PEP: 829
Title: Structured Startup Configuration via .site.toml Files
Author: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 31-Mar-2026
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History:


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a TOML-based configuration file format to replace
the ``.pth`` file mechanism used by ``site.py`` during interpreter
startup.  The new format, using files named ``<package>.site.toml``,
provides structured configuration for extending ``sys.path`` and
executing package initialization code, replacing the current ad-hoc
``.pth`` format that conflates path configuration with arbitrary code
execution.


Motivation
==========

Python's ``.pth`` files (processed by ``Lib/site.py`` at startup)
support two functions:

#. **Extending** ``sys.path`` -- Lines in this file (excluding
   comments and lines that start with ``import``) name directories to
   be appended to ``sys.path``.  Relative paths are implicitly
   anchored at the site-packages directory.

#. **Executing code** -- lines starting with ``import`` (or
   ``import\\t``) are executed immediately by passing the source string
   to ``exec()``.

This design has several problems:

#. Code execution is a side effect of the implementation.  Lines that
   start with ``import`` can be extended by separating multiple
   statements with a semicolon.  As long as all the code to be
   executed appears on the same line, it all gets executed when the
   ``.pth`` file is processed.

#. ``.pth`` files are essentially unstructured, leading to contents
   which are difficult to reason about or verify, and often even
   difficult to read.  It mixes two potentially useful features with
   different security constraints, and no way to separate out these
   concerns.

#. The lack of ``.pth`` file structure also means there's no way to
   express metadata, no future-proofing of the format, and no defined
   execution or processing order of the contents.

#. Using ``exec()`` on the file contents during interpreter startup is
   a broad attack surface.

#. There is no explicit concept of an entry point, which is an
   established pattern in Python packaging.  Packages that require
   code execution and initialization at startup abuse ``import`` lines
   rather than explicitly declaring entry points.


Specification
=============

This PEP defines a new file format called ``<package>.site.toml``
which addresses all of the stated problems with ``.pth`` files.  Like
``.pth`` files, ``<package>.site.toml`` files are processed at Python
startup time by the ``site.py`` module, which means that the ``-S``
option, which disables ``site.py`` also disables
``<package>.site.toml`` files.

The standard library ``tomllib`` package is used to read and process
``<package>.site.toml`` files.

Any parsing errors cause the entire ``<package>.site.toml`` file to be
ignored and not processed (but it still supersedes any parallel
``<package>.pth`` file).  Any errors that occur when importing entry
point modules or calling entry point functions are reported but do no
abort the Python executable.


File Naming and Discovery
-------------------------

* As with ``.pth`` files, packages may optionally install a single
  ``<package>.site.toml``, just like the current ``.pth`` file
  convention.

* The naming convention is ``<package>.site.toml``.  The ``.site``
  marker distinguishes these from other TOML files that might exist in
  site-packages and describes the file's purpose (processed by
  ``site.py``).

* ``<package>.site.toml`` files live in the same site-packages directories
  where ``.pth`` files are found today.

* The discovery rules for ``<package>.site.toml`` files is the same as
  ``.pth`` files today.  File names that start with a single ``.``
  (e.g. ``.site.toml``) and files with OS-level hidden attributes (``UF_HIDDEN``,
  ``FILE_ATTRIBUTE_HIDDEN``) are excluded.

* The processing order is alphabetical by filename, matching ``.pth``
  behavior.

* If both ``<package>.site.toml`` and ``<package>.pth`` exist in the same
  directory, only the ``<package>.site.toml`` file is processed.


Processing Model
----------------

All ``<package>.site.toml`` files in a given site-packages directory
are read and parsed into an intermediate data structure before any
processing (i.e. path extension or entry point execution) occurs.
This two-phase approach (read then process) enables:

* A future **policy mechanism** that can inspect and modify the collected data
  before execution (e.g., disabling entry points for specific packages or
  enforcing path restrictions).  **NOTE**: Such a policy framework is
  explicitly out-of-scope for this PEP.

* Future finer-grained control over the processing of path extensions
  and entry point execution.  For example, one could imagine special
  ``-X`` options, environment variables, or other types of
  configuration that allow path extensions only, or can explicitly
  manage allow or deny lists of entry points.  **NOTE**: Such
  configuration options are explicitly out-of-scope for this PEP.

* Better error reporting.  All parsing, format, and data type errors
  can be surfaced before any processing occurs.

Within each site-packages directory, the processing order is:

#. Discover and parse all ``<package>.site.toml`` files (alphabetically).
#. Process all ``[paths]`` entries from the parsed data.
#. Execute all ``[entrypoints]`` entries from the parsed data.
#. Process any remaining ``<package>.pth`` files that are not superseded by a
   ``<package>.site.toml`` file.

This ensures that path extensions are in place before any entry point code
runs, and that ``<package>.site.toml``-declared paths are available to both
entry point imports and ``<package>.pth`` import lines.


<package>.site.toml file schema
-------------------------------

A ``<package>.site.toml`` file is defined to have three sections, all of which
are optional:

.. code-block:: toml

    [metadata]
    schema_version = 1
    package = "foo"
    version = "2.3.4"
    author = "A Person <aperson@example.com>"

    [paths]
    dirs = ["../lib", "/opt/mylib", "{sitedir}/extra"]

    [entrypoints]
    init = ["foo.startup:initialize", "foo.plugins"]


``[metadata]``
''''''''''''''

This section contains package and/or file metadata.  There are no required
keys, and no semantics are assigned to any keys in this section *except* for
the optional ``schema_version`` key (see below).  Any additional keys are
permitted and preserved.

Defined keys:

``schema_version`` (integer, recommended)
    The TOML file schema version number.  Must be the integer ``1`` for this
    specification.  If present, Python guarantees forward-compatible handling:
    future versions will either process the file according to the declared
    schema or skip it with a clear diagnostic.  If the
    ``schema_version`` is present but has an unsupported value, the
    entire file is skipped.  If ``schema_version`` is omitted, the file is processed
    on a best-effort basis with no forward-compatibility guarantees.

Recommended keys:

``package`` (string)
    The package name.

``version`` (string)
    The package version.

``author`` (string)
    The package author.  Should be
    ``email.utils.parseaddr()``-compatible, e.g.,
    ``"A person <aperson@example.com>"`` or
    ``"aperson@example.com"``.


``[paths]``
'''''''''''

Defined keys:

``dirs``
    A list of strings specifying directories to append to ``sys.path``.

Path entries use a hybrid resolution scheme:

* **Relative paths** are anchored at the site-packages directory (sitedir),
  matching current ``.pth`` behavior.  For example, ``../lib`` in a file under
  ``/usr/lib/python3.15/site-packages/`` resolves to
  ``/usr/lib/python3.15/lib``.

* **Absolute paths** are preserved as-is.  For example, ``/opt/mylib`` is used
  exactly as written.

* **Placeholder variables** are supported using ``{name}`` syntax.  The
  placeholder ``{sitedir}`` expands to the site-packages directory where the
  ``<package>.site.toml`` file was found.  Thus ``{sitedir}/relpath`` and
  ``relpath`` resolve to the same path and this is the explicit form
  of the relative path form.

While only ``{sitedir}`` is defined in this PEP, additional
placeholder variables (e.g., ``{prefix}``, ``{exec_prefix}``,
``{userbase}``) may be defined in future PEPs.

If ``dirs`` is not a list of strings, a warning is emitted (visible
with ``-v``) and the section is skipped.

Directories that do not exist on the filesystem are silently skipped,
matching ``<package>.pth`` behavior.  Duplicate paths are
de-duplicated, also matching ``<package>.pth`` behavior.


``[entrypoints]``
'''''''''''''''''

``init`` -- a list of strings specifying entry point references to
execute at startup.  Each item uses the standard Python entry point
syntax: ``package.module:callable``.

* The ``:callable`` portion is optional.  If omitted (e.g.,
  ``package.module``), the module is imported via
  ``importlib.import_module()`` but nothing is called.  This covers the common
  ``<package>.pth`` pattern of ``import foo`` for side effects.

* Callables are invoked with no arguments.

* Entries are executed in the listed order.

* The ``[extras]`` syntax from the packaging entry point spec is not
  supported; it is installer metadata and has no meaning at
  interpreter startup.


General Schema Rules
''''''''''''''''''''

* All three sections are optional.  An empty ``<package>.site.toml``
  file is a valid no-op.

* Unknown tables are silently ignored, providing forward compatibility for
  future extensions.

* ``[paths]`` is always processed before ``[entrypoints]``, regardless of the
  order the sections appear in the TOML file.


Error Handling
--------------

Errors are handled differently depending on the phase:

Phase 1: Reading and Parsing
    If a ``<package>.site.toml`` file cannot be opened, decoded, or parsed as
    valid TOML, it is skipped and processing continues to the next file.
    Errors are reported only when ``-v`` (verbose) is given.  Importantly,
    a ``<package>.site.toml`` file that fails to parse **still supersedes**
    its corresponding ``<package>.pth`` file.  The existence of the
    ``<package>.site.toml`` file is sufficient to suppress
    ``<package>.pth`` processing, regardless of whether the TOML file
    parses successfully.  This prevents confusing dual-execution
    scenarios and ensures that a broken ``<package>.site.toml`` is
    noticed rather than silently masked by fallback to the
    ``<package>.pth`` file.

Phase 2: Execution
    If a path entry or entry point raises an exception during processing, the
    traceback is printed to ``sys.stderr``, the failing entry is skipped, and
    processing continues with the remaining entries in that file and
    subsequent files.

This is a deliberate improvement over ``.pth`` behavior, which aborts
processing the remainder of a file on the first error.


Rationale
=========

TOML as the configuration format
    TOML is already used by ``pyproject.toml`` and is familiar to the Python
    packaging ecosystem.  It is an easily human readable and writable format
    that aids in validation and auditing.  TOML files are structured and
    typed, and can be easily reasoned about.  TOML files allows for easy
    future extensibility.  The ``tomllib`` module is available in the standard
    library since Python 3.11.

The ``<package>.site.toml`` naming convention
    A double extension clearly communicates purpose: the ``.site`` marker
    indicates this is a site-startup configuration file, while ``.toml``
    indicates the format.  This avoids ambiguity with other TOML files that
    might exist in site-packages now or in the future.  The package name
    prefix preserves the current ``<package>.pth`` convention of a single
    startup file per package.

Hybrid path resolution
    Implicit relative path joining (matching ``<package>.pth`` behavior)
    provides a smooth migration path, while ``{sitedir}`` and future
    placeholder variables offer explicit, extensible alternatives.  As with
    ``<package>.pth`` files, absolute paths are preserved and used verbatim.

``importlib.import_module()`` instead of ``exec()``
    Using the standard import machinery is more predictable and auditable than
    ``exec()``.  It integrates with the import system's hooks and logging, and
    the ``package.module:callable`` syntax is already well-established in the
    Python packaging ecosystem (e.g., ``console_scripts``).  Allowing for
    optional ``:callable`` syntax preserves the import-side-effect
    functionality of ``<package>.pth`` files, making migration easier.

Two-phase processing
    Reading all configuration before executing any of it provides a natural
    extension point for future policy mechanisms and makes error reporting
    more predictable.

Alphabetical ordering with no priority mechanism
    Packages are installed independently, and there is no external arbiter of
    priority.  Alphabetical ordering matches ``<package>.pth`` behavior and is
    simple to reason about.  Priority could be addressed by a future site-wide
    policy configuration.

``schema_version`` as recommended, not required
    Requiring ``schema_version`` would make the simplest valid file more
    verbose.  Making it recommended strikes a balance: files that include it
    get forward-compatibility guarantees, while simple files that omit it
    still work on a best-effort basis.

Continue on error rather than abort
    The ``<package>.pth`` behavior of aborting the rest of a file on the first
    error is unnecessarily harsh.  If a package declares three entry points
    and one fails, the other two should still run.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

* ``<package>.pth`` file processing is **not** removed.  Both
  ``<package>.pth`` and ``<package>.site.toml`` files are discovered
  in parallel within each site-packages directory.  This preserves
  backward compatibility for all existing (pre-migration) packages.
  Deprecation of ``<package>.pth`` files is out-of-scope for this PEP.

* When ``<package>.site.toml`` exists alongside ``<package>.pth``, the
  ``<package>.site.toml`` takes precedence and the ``<package>.pth`` file is
  skipped, providing for a natural migration path and easy compatibility with
  older versions of Python which are unaware of ``<package>.site.toml`` files.

* Within a site-packages directory, all ``<package>.site.toml`` files
  are fully processed (paths and entry points) before any remaining
  ``<package>.pth`` files.

* The ``site.addsitedir()`` public API retains its existing signature
  and continues to accept ``known_paths``.


Security Implications
=====================

This PEP improves the security posture of interpreter startup:

* ``<package>.site.toml`` files replace ``exec()`` with
  ``importlib.import_module()`` and explicit ``getattr()`` calls,
  which are more constrained and auditable.

* ``io.open_code()`` is used to read ``<package>.site.toml`` files, ensuring
  that audit hooks (:pep:`578`) can monitor file access.

* The two-phase processing model creates a natural point where a future policy
  mechanism could inspect and restrict what gets executed.

* The ``package.module:callable`` syntax limits execution to
  importable modules and their attributes, unlike ``exec()`` which can
  run arbitrary code.

The overall attack surface is not eliminated -- a malicious
``<package>.site.toml`` file can still cause arbitrary code execution via
``init`` entrypoints, but the mechanism proposed in this PEP is more
structured, auditable, and amenable to policy controls.


How to Teach This
=================

For package authors
-------------------

If your package currently ships a ``<package>.pth`` file, you can migrate to a
``<package>.site.toml`` file.  The equivalent of a ``<package>.pth`` file
containing a directory name is:

.. code-block:: toml

    [paths]
    dirs = ["my_directory"]

The equivalent of a ``<package>.pth`` file containing ``import my_package``
is:

.. code-block:: toml

    [entrypoints]
    init = ["my_package"]

If your ``<package>.pth`` file calls a specific function, use the
``module:callable`` syntax:

.. code-block:: toml

    [entrypoints]
    init = ["my_package.startup:initialize"]

If your ``<package>.pth`` file includes arbitrary code, put that code in a
start up function and use the ``module:callable`` syntax.

Both ``<package>.pth`` and ``<package>.site.toml`` can coexist during
migration.  If both exist for the same package, only the ``<package>.site.toml`` is
processed.  Thus, it is recommended that packages compatible with older
Pythons ship both files.

For tool authors
----------------

 Build backends and installers should generate ``<package>.site.toml`` files
 alongside or instead of ``<package>.pth`` files, depending on the package's
 Python support matrix.  The TOML format is easy to generate programmatically
 using ``tomllib`` (for reading) or string formatting (for writing, since the
 schema is simple).


Reference Implementation
=========================

A reference implementation is provided as modifications to ``Lib/site.py``,
adding the following:

* ``_SiteTOMLData`` -- a ``__slots__`` class holding parsed data from
  a single ``<package>.site.toml`` file (metadata, dirs, init).

* ``_read_site_toml(sitedir, name)`` -- reads and parses a single
  ``<package>.site.toml`` file, validates types, and returns a
  ``_SiteTOMLData`` instance or ``None`` on error.

* ``_process_site_toml_paths(toml_data_list, known_paths)`` --
  processes ``[paths].dirs`` from all parsed files, expanding
  placeholders and adding directories to ``sys.path`` as appropriate.

* ``_process_site_toml_entrypoints(toml_data_list)`` -- executes
  ``[entrypoints].init`` from all parsed files.

* Modified ``addsitedir()`` -- orchestrates the three-phase flow:
  discover and parse ``<package>.site.toml`` files, process paths and
  entry points, then process remaining ``<package>.pth`` files.

Tests are provided in ``Lib/test/test_site.py`` in the
``SiteTomlTests`` class.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Single configuration file instead of per-package files
    A single site-wide configuration file was considered but rejected
    because it would require coordination between independently
    installed packages and would not mirror the ``<package>.pth``
    convention that tools already understand.

JSON instead of TOML
    JSON lacks comments and is less human-friendly.  TOML is already
    the standard configuration format in the Python ecosystem via
    ``pyproject.toml``.

YAML instead of TOML
    YAML is not in the standard library and has well-documented
    parsing pitfalls.

Python instead of TOML
    Python is imperative, TOML is declarative.  Thus TOML files are
    much more readily validated and reasoned about.

``$schema`` URL reference
    Unlike JSON, TOML has no standard ``$schema`` convention.  A
    simple integer ``schema_version`` is sufficient and
    self-contained.

Required ``schema_version``
    Requiring ``schema_version`` would make the simplest valid file
    more verbose without significant benefit.  The recommended-but-
    optional approach balances simplicity with future-proofing.

Separate ``load`` and ``execute`` keys in ``[entrypoints]``
    Splitting import-only and callable entry points into separate lists
    was considered but rejected because it complicates execution
    ordering.  A single ``init`` list with both forms keeps ordering
    explicit.

Priority or weight field for processing order
    Since packages are installed independently, there is no arbiter of
    priority.  Alphabetical ordering matches ``<package>.pth``
    behavior.  Priority could be addressed by a future site-wide
    policy configuration file, not per-package metadata.

Passing arguments to callables
    Callables are invoked with no arguments for simplicity and parity
    with existing ``<package>.pth`` import behavior.  Future PEPs may
    define an optional context argument (e.g., the parsed TOML data or
    a site info object).


Open Issues
===========

* Should a warning be emitted when both ``<package>.pth`` and
  ``<package>.site.toml`` coexist?

* Should future ``-X`` options provide fine-grained control over
  error reporting, unknown table warnings, and entry point execution?

* Should callables receive context (e.g., the path to the
  ``<package>.site.toml`` file, the parsed TOML data, or a site info object)?

* What additional placeholder variables should be supported beyond
  ``{sitedir}``?  Candidates include ``{prefix}``, ``{exec_prefix}``, and
  ``{userbase}``.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
