PEP: 9999
Title: The pprint protocol
Author: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Eric V. Smith <eric at trueblade.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 03-Nov-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: Pending


Abstract
========

This PEP describes the "pprint protocol", a collection of changes proposed to make pretty printing more
customizable and convenient.


Motivation
==========

"Pretty printing" is a feature which provides a capability to format object representations for better
readability.  The core functionality is implemented by the standard library :mod:`pprint`.  ``pprint``
includes a class and APIs which users can invoke to format and print more readable representations of objects.
Important use cases include pretty printing large dictionaries and other complicated objects.

The ``pprint`` module is great as far as it goes.  This PEP builds on the features of this module to provide
more customization and convenience.


Rationale
=========

Pretty printing is very useful for displaying complex data structures, like dictionaries read from JSON
content.  By providing a way for classes to customize how their instances participate in pretty printing,
users have more options for visually improving the display and debugging of their complex data.

By extending the built-in :py:func:`print` function to automatically pretty print its output, this feature is
made even more convenient, since no extra imports are required, and users can easily just piggyback on
well-worn "print debugging" patterns, at least for the most common use cases.

These two extensions work independently, but hand-in-hand can provide a powerful and convenient new feature.


Specification
=============

There are two parts to this proposal.


``__pretty__()`` methods
------------------------

Classes can implement a new dunder method, ``__pretty__()`` which if present, generates the pretty printed
representation of their instances.  This augments ``__repr__()`` which, prior to this proposal, was the only
method used to generate a pretty representation of the object.  Since the built-in :py:func:`repr` function
provides functionality potentially separate from pretty printing, some classes may want more control over
object display between those two use cases.

``__pretty__()`` is optional; if missing, the standard pretty printers fall back to ``__repr__()`` for full
backward compatibility.  However, if defined on a class, ``__pretty__()`` has the same argument signature as
:py:func:`PrettyPrinter.format`, taking four arguments:

* ``object`` - the object to print, which is effectively always ``self``
* ``context`` - a dictionary mapping the ``id()`` of objects which are part of the current presentation
  context
* ``maxlevels`` - the requested limit to recursion
* ``levels`` - the current recursion level

See :py:func:`PrettyPrinter.format` for details.

Unlike that function, ``__pretty__()`` returns a single value, the string to be used as the pretty printed
representation.


A new argument to built-in ``print``
------------------------------------

Built-in :py:func:`print` takes a new optional argument, appended to the end of the argument list, called
``pretty``, which can take one of the following values:

* ``None`` - the default; fully backward compatible
* ``True`` - use a temporary instance of the :py:class:`PrettyPrinter` class to get a pretty representation of
  the object.
* An instance with a ``pformat()`` method, which has the same signature as
  :meth:`PrettyPrinter.pformat`.  When given, this will usually be an instance of a subclass of
  `PrettyPrinter` with its `pformat()` method overridden.  Note that this form requires **an
  instance** of a pretty printer, not a class, as only ``print(..., pretty=True)`` performs implicit
  instantiation.


Examples
========

A custom ``__pprint__()`` method can be used to customize the representation of the object:

.. _code-block:

    >>> class Custom:
    ...     def __str__(self): return 'my str'
    ...     def __repr__(self): return 'my repr'
    ...     def __pprint__(self, context, maxlevels, level): return 'my pprint'

    >>> pprint.pp(Custom())
    my pprint

Using the ``pretty`` argument to ``print()``:

.. _code-block:

    >>> import os
    >>> print(os.pathconf_names)
    {'PC_ASYNC_IO': 17, 'PC_CHOWN_RESTRICTED': 7, 'PC_FILESIZEBITS': 18, 'PC_LINK_MAX': 1, 'PC_MAX_CANON': 2, 'PC_MAX_INPUT': 3, 'PC_NAME_MAX': 4, 'PC_NO_TRUNC': 8, 'PC_PATH_MAX': 5, 'PC_PIPE_BUF': 6, 'PC_PRIO_IO': 19, 'PC_SYNC_IO': 25, 'PC_VDISABLE': 9, 'PC_MIN_HOLE_SIZE': 27, 'PC_ALLOC_SIZE_MIN': 16, 'PC_REC_INCR_XFER_SIZE': 20, 'PC_REC_MAX_XFER_SIZE': 21, 'PC_REC_MIN_XFER_SIZE': 22, 'PC_REC_XFER_ALIGN': 23, 'PC_SYMLINK_MAX': 24}
    >>> print(os.pathconf_names, pretty=True)
    {'PC_ALLOC_SIZE_MIN': 16,
     'PC_ASYNC_IO': 17,
     'PC_CHOWN_RESTRICTED': 7,
     'PC_FILESIZEBITS': 18,
     'PC_LINK_MAX': 1,
     'PC_MAX_CANON': 2,
     'PC_MAX_INPUT': 3,
     'PC_MIN_HOLE_SIZE': 27,
     'PC_NAME_MAX': 4,
     'PC_NO_TRUNC': 8,
     'PC_PATH_MAX': 5,
     'PC_PIPE_BUF': 6,
     'PC_PRIO_IO': 19,
     'PC_REC_INCR_XFER_SIZE': 20,
     'PC_REC_MAX_XFER_SIZE': 21,
     'PC_REC_MIN_XFER_SIZE': 22,
     'PC_REC_XFER_ALIGN': 23,
     'PC_SYMLINK_MAX': 24,
     'PC_SYNC_IO': 25,
     'PC_VDISABLE': 9}


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

When none of the new features are used, this PEP is fully backward compatible, both for built-in
``print()`` and the ``pprint`` module.


Security Implications
=====================

There are no known security implications for this proposal.


How to Teach This
=================

Documentation and examples are added to the ``pprint`` module and the ``print()`` function.
Beginners don't need to be taught these new features until they want prettier representations of
their objects.


Reference Implementation
========================

The reference implementation is currently available as a `PEP author branch of the CPython main
branch <https://github.com/warsaw/cpython/tree/pprint>`__.


Rejected Ideas
==============

None at this time.


Open Issues
===========

As currently defined, the ``__pretty__()`` method is defined as taking four arguments and returning
a single string.  This is close to -- but not quite -- the full signature for
``PrettyPrinter.format()``, and was chosen for reference implementation convenience.  It's not
clear that custom pretty representations need ``context``, ``maxlevels``, and ``levels``, so perhaps
the argument list should be simplified?  If not, then perhaps ``__pretty__()`` should *exactly*
match ``PrettyPrinter.format()``?  That does, however complicate the protocol for users.


Acknowledgements
================

TBD


Footnotes
=========

TBD


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
