.. bpo: 1733757
.. date: 6865
.. nonce: cyKvMt
.. release date: 02-Apr-2008
.. section: Core and Builtins

The interpreter would hang on shutdown if the tracing function set by
sys.settrace is still active and happens to call threading.currentThread().

..

.. bpo: 1442
.. date: 6864
.. nonce: h73ZTm
.. section: Core and Builtins

properly report exceptions when the PYTHONSTARTUP file cannot be executed.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6863
.. nonce: q3LWX0
.. section: Core and Builtins

The compilation of a class nested in another class used to leak one
reference on the outer class name.

..

.. bpo: 1810
.. date: 6862
.. nonce: ESXjRG
.. section: Core and Builtins

compile() can now compile _ast trees as returned by ``compile(...,
PyCF_ONLY_AST)``.

..

.. bpo: 2426
.. date: 6861
.. nonce: H-NFT6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added sqlite3.Connection.iterdump method to allow easy dumping of databases.
Contributed by Paul Kippes at PyCon 2008.

..

.. bpo: 2477
.. date: 6860
.. nonce: iEeee2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added from __future__ import unicode_literals.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6859
.. nonce: MQCT3j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added backport of bytearray type.

..

.. bpo: 2355
.. date: 6858
.. nonce: 3IrFJn
.. section: Core and Builtins

add Py3k warning for buffer().

..

.. bpo: 1477
.. date: 6857
.. nonce: kL8T9Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

With narrow Unicode builds, the unicode escape sequence \Uxxxxxxxx did not
accept values outside the Basic Multilingual Plane.  This affected raw
unicode literals and the 'raw-unicode-escape' codec.  Now UTF-16 surrogates
are generated in this case, like normal unicode literals and the
'unicode-escape' codec.

..

.. bpo: 2348
.. date: 6856
.. nonce: bTKRrx
.. section: Core and Builtins

add Py3k warning for file.softspace.

..

.. bpo: 2346
.. date: 6855
.. nonce: ZdxBIW
.. section: Core and Builtins

add Py3k warnings for __methods__ and __members__. (See also: bpo-2347)

..

.. bpo: 2358
.. date: 6854
.. nonce: -9p_qA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a Py3k warning on sys.exc_clear() usage.

..

.. bpo: 2400
.. date: 6853
.. nonce: Vh9y6O
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow relative imports to "import *".

..

.. bpo: 1745
.. date: 6852
.. nonce: E7-cUG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Backport print function with ``from __future__ import print_function``.

..

.. bpo: 2332
.. date: 6851
.. nonce: J5iU51
.. section: Core and Builtins

add new attribute names for instance method objects. The two changes are:
im_self -> __self__ and im_func -> __func__

..

.. bpo: 2379
.. date: 6850
.. nonce: 9-tqgC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a Py3K warning for __getitem__ or __getslice__ on exception instances.

..

.. bpo: 2371
.. date: 6849
.. nonce: xuvdpy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a Py3k warning when catching an exception that doesn't derive from
BaseException.

..

.. bpo: 2341
.. date: 6848
.. nonce: LmD2N7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a Py3k warning when raising an exception that doesn't derive from
BaseException.

..

.. bpo: 2321
.. date: 6847
.. nonce: v7FzTy
.. section: Core and Builtins

use pymalloc for unicode object string data to reduce memory usage in some
circumstances.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6846
.. nonce: O8A72m
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3127: octal literals now start with "0o". Old-style octal literals are
still valid. There are binary literals with a prefix of "0b".  This also
affects int(x, 0).

..

.. bpo: 2359
.. date: 6845
.. nonce: cR7f7i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Adding deprecation warnings for array.{read,write}.

..

.. bpo: 1779871
.. date: 6844
.. nonce: Q9u7-T
.. section: Core and Builtins

GNU gcc can now build Python on OS X because the flags -Wno-long-double,
-no-cpp-precomp, and -mno-fused-madd are no longer passed.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6843
.. nonce: 00spAB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a warning when asserting a non-empty tuple which is always true.

..

.. bpo: 2179
.. date: 6842
.. nonce: 6ZA8c-
.. section: Core and Builtins

speed up with statement execution by storing the exit method on the stack
instead of in a temporary variable (patch by Jeffrey Yaskin)

..

.. bpo: 2238
.. date: 6841
.. nonce: LMUvyp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Some syntax errors in *args and **kwargs expressions could give bogus error
messages.

..

.. bpo: 2143
.. date: 6840
.. nonce: 39hw9G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix embedded readline() hang on SSL socket EOF.

..

.. bpo: 2240
.. date: 6839
.. nonce: WNReGo
.. section: Library

Implement signal.setitimer and signal.getitimer.

..

.. bpo: 2315
.. date: 6838
.. nonce: pqno5o
.. section: Library

logging.handlers: TimedRotatingFileHandler now accounts for daylight savings
time in calculating the next rollover.

..

.. bpo: 2316
.. date: 6837
.. nonce: ZS89xB
.. section: Library

logging.handlers: TimedRotatingFileHandler now calculates rollovers
correctly even when nothing is logged for a while.

..

.. bpo: 2317
.. date: 6836
.. nonce: 4RDUg2
.. section: Library

logging.handlers: TimedRotatingFileHandler now uses improved logic for
removing old files.

..

.. bpo: 2495
.. date: 6835
.. nonce: XaNV_D
.. section: Library

tokenize.untokenize now inserts a space between two consecutive string
literals; previously, ["" ""] was rendered as [""""], which is incorrect
python code.

..

.. bpo: 2248
.. date: 6834
.. nonce: EFdgNK
.. section: Library

return the result of the QUIT command. from SMTP.quit().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6833
.. nonce: lDMF2h
.. section: Library

Backport of Python 3.0's io module.

..

.. bpo: 2482
.. date: 6832
.. nonce: gt5k7F
.. section: Library

Make sure that the coefficient of a Decimal is always stored as a str
instance, not as a unicode instance.  This ensures that str(Decimal) is
always an instance of str.

..

.. bpo: 2478
.. date: 6831
.. nonce: A33H1n
.. section: Library

fix failure of decimal.Decimal(0).sqrt()

..

.. bpo: 2432
.. date: 6830
.. nonce: K_Wmv6
.. section: Library

give DictReader the dialect and line_num attributes advertised in the docs.

..

.. bpo: 2460
.. date: 6829
.. nonce: N-GQGP
.. section: Library

Make Ellipsis object copyable.

..

.. bpo: 1681432
.. date: 6828
.. nonce: UMEj9l
.. section: Library

Add triangular distribution to the random module

..

.. bpo: 2136
.. date: 6827
.. nonce: pMUClw
.. section: Library

urllib2's auth handler now allows single-quoted realms in the
WWW-Authenticate header.

..

.. bpo: 2434
.. date: 6826
.. nonce: 7NhX4x
.. section: Library

Enhanced platform.win32_ver() to also work on Python installation which do
not have the win32all package installed.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6825
.. nonce: Mua_8k
.. section: Library

Added support to platform.uname() to also report the machine and processor
information on Windows XP and later. As a result, platform.machine() and
platform.processor() will report this information as well.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6824
.. nonce: TVfcNn
.. section: Library

The library implementing the 2to3 conversion, lib2to3, was added to the
standard distribution.

..

.. bpo: 1747858
.. date: 6823
.. nonce: q45meX
.. section: Library

Fix chown to work with large uid's and gid's on 64-bit platforms.

..

.. bpo: 1202
.. date: 6822
.. nonce: aihbD5
.. section: Library

zlib.crc32 and zlib.adler32 no longer return different values on 32-bit vs.
64-bit python interpreters.  Both were correct, but they now both return a
signed integer object for consistency.

..

.. bpo: 1158
.. date: 6821
.. nonce: AkVzAm
.. section: Library

add %f format (fractions of a second represented as microseconds) to
datetime objects.  Understood by both strptime and strftime.

..

.. bpo: 705836
.. date: 6820
.. nonce: g5peII
.. section: Library

struct.pack(">f", x) now raises OverflowError on all platforms when x is too
large to fit into an IEEE 754 float; previously it only raised OverflowError
on non IEEE 754 platforms.

..

.. bpo: 2166
.. date: 6819
.. nonce: WF2f5f
.. section: Library

now distutils deals with HOME correctly under win32 (See also: bpo-1741,
bpo-1531505)

..

.. bpo: 1858
.. date: 6818
.. nonce: jGCMLw
.. section: Library

distutils: added multiple server support in .pypirc

..

.. bpo: 1106316
.. date: 6817
.. nonce: uk36rF
.. section: Library

pdb.post_mortem()'s parameter, "traceback", is now optional: it defaults to
the traceback of the exception that is currently being handled (is mandatory
to be in the middle of an exception, otherwise it raises ValueError).

..

.. bpo: 1193577
.. date: 6816
.. nonce: b-BahY
.. section: Library

A .shutdown() method has been added to SocketServers which terminates the
.serve_forever() loop.

..

.. bpo: 2220
.. date: 6815
.. nonce: qjYxWH
.. section: Library

handle rlcompleter attribute match failure more gracefully.

..

.. bpo: 2225
.. date: 6814
.. nonce: a0QsFA
.. section: Library

py_compile, when executed as a script, now returns a non- zero status code
if not all files could be compiled successfully.

..

.. bpo: 1725737
.. date: 6813
.. nonce: nvfK6A
.. section: Library

In distutils' sdist, exclude RCS, CVS etc. also in the root directory, and
also exclude .hg, .git, .bzr, and _darcs.

..

.. bpo: 1872
.. date: 6812
.. nonce: m8TmRv
.. section: Library

The struct module typecode for _Bool has been changed from 't' to '?'.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6811
.. nonce: VqAlAz
.. section: Library

The bundled libffi copy is now in sync with the recently released
libffi3.0.4 version, apart from some small changes to
Modules/_ctypes/libffi/configure.ac.  On OS X, preconfigured libffi files
are used.  On all linux systems the --with-system-ffi configure option
defaults to "yes".

..

.. bpo: 1577
.. date: 6810
.. nonce: njrgUJ
.. section: Library

shutil.move() now calls os.rename() if the destination is a directory
instead of copying-then-remove-source.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6809
.. nonce: K5ZD7T
.. section: Tests

test_nis no longer fails when test.test_support.verbose is true and NIS is
not set up on the testing machine.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6808
.. nonce: 1ZE-e2
.. section: Tests

Output comparison tests are no longer supported.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6807
.. nonce: N2wGxu
.. section: Tests

Rewrite test_errno to use unittest and no longer be a no-op.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6806
.. nonce: f80pTz
.. section: Tests

GHOP 234: Convert test_extcall to doctest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6805
.. nonce: IG1fWw
.. section: Tests

GHOP 290: Convert test_dbm and test_dummy_threading to unittest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6804
.. nonce: 2Pr5hV
.. section: Tests

GHOP 293: Convert test_strftime, test_getargs, and test_pep247 to unittest.

..

.. bpo: 2055
.. date: 6803
.. nonce: yoFv4H
.. section: Tests

Convert test_fcntl to unittest.

..

.. bpo: 1960
.. date: 6802
.. nonce: 8bFRO9
.. section: Tests

Convert test_gdbm to unittest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6801
.. nonce: 5VXuUU
.. section: Tests

GHOP 294: Convert test_contains, test_crypt, and test_select to unittest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6800
.. nonce: Huq18v
.. section: Tests

GHOP 238: Convert test_tokenize to use doctest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6799
.. nonce: yrOIgp
.. section: Tests

GHOP 237: Rewrite test_thread using unittest.

..

.. bpo: 2232
.. date: 6798
.. nonce: gT2U-l
.. section: Tests

os.tmpfile might fail on Windows if the user has no permission to create
files in the root directory.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6797
.. nonce: xClq5J
.. section: Build

A new script 2to3 is now installed, to run the 2.x to 3.x converter.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6796
.. nonce: K_qDWf
.. section: Build

Python/memmove.c and Python/strerror.c have been removed; both functions are
in the C89 standard library.

..

.. bpo: 2284
.. date: 6795
.. nonce: g5HXfy
.. section: Build

Add -x64 option to rt.bat.

..

.. bpo: 2477
.. date: 6794
.. nonce: ff3qxW
.. section: C API

Added PyParser_ParseFileFlagsEx() and PyParser_ParseStringFlagsFilenameEx().
