.. bpo: 3211
.. date: 7017
.. nonce: 53eouC
.. release date: 18-June-2008
.. section: Core and Builtins

warnings.warn_explicit() did not guard against its 'registry' argument being
anything other than a dict or None. Also fixed a bug in error handling when
'message' and 'category' were both set to None, triggering a bus error.

..

.. bpo: 3100
.. date: 7016
.. nonce: FGUaxt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Corrected a crash on deallocation of a subclassed weakref which holds the
last (strong) reference to its referent.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7015
.. nonce: habgq9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add future_builtins.ascii().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7014
.. nonce: ZqCwWn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Several set methods now accept multiple arguments: update(), union(),
intersection(), intersection_update(), difference(), and
difference_update().

..

.. bpo: 2898
.. date: 7013
.. nonce: 3Al5vX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added sys.getsizeof() to retrieve size of objects in bytes.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7012
.. nonce: 7NZKM7
.. section: Core and Builtins

New environment variable PYTHONIOENCODING.

..

.. bpo: 2488
.. date: 7011
.. nonce: SglN-p
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add sys.maxsize.

..

.. bpo: 2353
.. date: 7010
.. nonce: IYOwih
.. section: Core and Builtins

file.xreadlines() now emits a Py3k warning.

..

.. bpo: 2863
.. date: 7009
.. nonce: rpJxY7
.. section: Core and Builtins

generators now have a ``gen.__name__`` attribute that equals
``gen.gi_code.co_name``, like ``func.__name___`` that equals
``func.func_code.co_name``.  The repr() of a generator now also contains
this name.

..

.. bpo: 2831
.. date: 7008
.. nonce: Clokao
.. section: Core and Builtins

enumerate() now has a ``start`` argument.

..

.. bpo: 2801
.. date: 7007
.. nonce: mKH_h9
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix bug in the float.is_integer method where a ValueError was sometimes
incorrectly raised.

..

.. bpo: 2790
.. date: 7006
.. nonce: XESeko
.. section: Core and Builtins

sys.flags was not properly exposing its bytes_warning attribute.

..

.. bpo: 2196
.. date: 7005
.. nonce: Bzc5vC
.. section: Core and Builtins

hasattr() now lets exceptions which do not inherit Exception
(KeyboardInterrupt, and SystemExit) propagate instead of ignoring them.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7004
.. nonce: PBmDwc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added checks for integer overflows, contributed by Google. Some are only
available if asserts are left in the code, in cases where they can't be
triggered from Python code.

..

.. bpo: 1179
.. date: 7003
.. nonce: ZiG6Oq
.. section: Library

[CVE-2007-4965] Integer overflow in imageop module.

..

.. bpo: 3116
.. date: 7002
.. nonce: A_baFS
.. section: Library

marshal.dumps() had quadratic behavior for strings > 32Mb.

..

.. bpo: 2138
.. date: 7001
.. nonce: 1v8Wds
.. section: Library

Add factorial() to the math module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7000
.. nonce: Zg08xh
.. section: Library

The heapq module does comparisons using LT instead of LE.  This makes its
implementation match that used by list.sort().

..

.. bpo: 2819
.. date: 6999
.. nonce: 8rJOqA
.. section: Library

add full-precision summation function to math module, based on Hettinger's
ASPN Python Cookbook recipe.

..

.. bpo: 2592
.. date: 6998
.. nonce: dyYM9F
.. section: Library

delegate nb_index and the floor/truediv slots in weakref.proxy.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6997
.. nonce: 9pq1AU
.. section: Library

Support os.O_ASYNC and fcntl.FASYNC if the constants exist on the platform.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6996
.. nonce: xpuGyu
.. section: Library

Support for Windows 9x has been removed from the winsound module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6995
.. nonce: QqGmIr
.. section: Library

bsddb module updated to version 4.7.3.
http://www.jcea.es/programacion/pybsddb.htm#bsddb3-4.7.3. This code should
be compatible with Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 2858
.. date: 6994
.. nonce: klmpfU
.. section: Library

Fix potential memory corruption when bsddb.db.DBEnv.lock_get and other
bsddb.db object constructors raised an exception.

..

.. bpo: 2669
.. date: 6993
.. nonce: ThHCIr
.. section: Library

bsddb/__init__.py iteration no longer silently fails when the database has
changed size during iteration.  It now raises a RuntimeError in the same
manner as a dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 2870
.. date: 6992
.. nonce: dmu5w6
.. section: Library

cmathmodule.c compile error.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6991
.. nonce: F-3bCT
.. section: Library

Added a threading.Thread.ident property.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6990
.. nonce: eoz_IQ
.. section: Library

logging.config: Removed out-of-date comment in _install_handlers and used
issubclass in place of equality comparison of classes.

..

.. bpo: 2722
.. date: 6989
.. nonce: wqgrWN
.. section: Library

Now the os.getcwd() supports very long path names.

..

.. bpo: 2888
.. date: 6988
.. nonce: gJe46M
.. section: Library

Fixed the behaviour of pprint when working with nested structures, to match
the behaviour of 2.5 and 3.0 (now follows the common sense).

..

.. bpo: 1817
.. date: 6987
.. nonce: pPMpU3
.. section: Library

cgi now correctly handles the querystring on POST requests

..

.. bpo: 3136
.. date: 6986
.. nonce: h_BTKr
.. section: Library

fileConfig()'s disabling of old loggers is now conditional via an optional
disable_existing_loggers parameter, but the default value is such that the
old behaviour is preserved. Thanks to Leandro Lucarella for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 3126
.. date: 6985
.. nonce: fTafXl
.. section: Library

StreamHandler and FileHandler check before calling "flush" and "close" that
the stream object has these, using hasattr (thanks to bobf for the patch).

..

.. bpo: 2912
.. date: 6984
.. nonce: eOMCRu
.. section: Library

platform.uname now tries to determine unknown information even if os.uname
exists.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6983
.. nonce: suPcSI
.. section: Library

The rfc822 module has been deprecated for removal in 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6982
.. nonce: UOZNCJ
.. section: Library

The mimetools module has been deprecated for removal in 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6981
.. nonce: RqZ_5y
.. section: Library

The ctypes.byref function now takes an optional second parameter which
specifies an offset in bytes for the constructed pointer-like object.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6980
.. nonce: oTWuUu
.. section: Library

Added the ast module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6979
.. nonce: fHFiuS
.. section: Library

Added the multiprocessing module, PEP 371.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6978
.. nonce: nlfVuP
.. section: Library

Factored out the indentation cleaning from inspect.getdoc() into
inspect.cleandoc() to ease standalone use.

..

.. bpo: 1798
.. date: 6977
.. nonce: AzgRaY
.. section: Library

Add ctypes calling convention that allows safe access to errno.

..

.. bpo: 2404
.. date: 6976
.. nonce: y3Vi2t
.. section: Library

ctypes objects support the new pep3118 buffer interface.

..

.. bpo: 2125
.. date: 6975
.. nonce: wZgsqd
.. section: Library

Add GetInteger and GetString methods for msilib.Record objects.

..

.. bpo: 2782
.. date: 6974
.. nonce: cDdM9Y
.. section: Library

The datetime module's strftime methods now accept unicode format strings
just as time.strftime always has.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6973
.. nonce: lhIEH0
.. section: Library

The sgmllib and htmllib modules have been deprecated for removal in Python
3.0.

..

.. bpo: 3011
.. date: 6972
.. nonce: 6bdKsn
.. section: Library

locale module alias table was updated to the latest version from the X.org
locale.alias file.

..

.. bpo: 1797
.. date: 6971
.. nonce: q7se8Q
.. section: Library

ctypes NULL function pointers have a False boolean value now.

..

.. bpo: 2985
.. date: 6970
.. nonce: Lj8FT6
.. section: Library

Allow 64-bit integer responses (``<i8>``) in XMLRPC transfers.

..

.. bpo: 2877
.. date: 6969
.. nonce: DHx0Vp
.. section: Library

The UserString.MutableString class has been removed in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6968
.. nonce: eAZNNA
.. section: Library

Do not close external file objects passed to tarfile.open(mode='w:bz2') when
the TarFile is closed.

..

.. bpo: 2959
.. date: 6967
.. nonce: VfcUGd
.. section: Library

For consistency with other file-like objects, gzip's GzipFile.close() can
now be called multiple times without raising an exception.

..

.. bpo: 1390
.. date: 6966
.. nonce: r5VD4K
.. section: Library

Raise ValueError in toxml when an invalid comment would otherwise be
produced.

..

.. bpo: 2914
.. date: 6965
.. nonce: vFi4D6
.. section: Library

TimedRotatingFileHandler now takes an optional keyword argument "utc" to use
UTC time rather than local time.

..

.. bpo: 2929
.. date: 6964
.. nonce: rN0khF
.. section: Library

TimedRotatingFileHandler was using the wrong path when deleting old log
files (filename only instead of full path).

..

.. bpo: 1775025
.. date: 6963
.. nonce: 0zA_rX
.. section: Library

You can now specify zipfile members to open(), read() or extract() via a
ZipInfo instance.  This allows handling duplicate filenames in zipfiles.

..

.. bpo: 961805
.. date: 6962
.. nonce: lic8H4
.. section: Library

Fix Text.edit_modified() in Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 1793
.. date: 6961
.. nonce: uqwZq4
.. section: Library

Function ctypes.util.find_msvcrt() added that returns the name of the C
runtime library that Python uses. ctypes.util.find_library(name) now call
this function when name is 'm' or 'c'.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6960
.. nonce: TYfaoC
.. section: Library

The statvfs module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6959
.. nonce: YxHVfd
.. section: Library

The sunaudiodev and SUNAUDIODEV modules have been deprecated for removal in
Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6958
.. nonce: xxpvg4
.. section: Library

The WAIT module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6957
.. nonce: 2EEuVl
.. section: Library

The torgb module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6956
.. nonce: DxcqyJ
.. section: Library

The SV module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6955
.. nonce: T3Yn6K
.. section: Library

The readcd module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6954
.. nonce: H9XINa
.. section: Library

The panelparser module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python
3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6953
.. nonce: zVi2Qa
.. section: Library

The panel module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6952
.. nonce: G7TA5T
.. section: Library

The jpeg module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6951
.. nonce: mVA78R
.. section: Library

The IOCTL module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6950
.. nonce: J4KyX6
.. section: Library

The IN module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6949
.. nonce: Nuh6UM
.. section: Library

The imgfile module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6948
.. nonce: UBseEw
.. section: Library

The GLWS module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6947
.. nonce: xgzC-j
.. section: Library

The GET module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6946
.. nonce: NgBwkl
.. section: Library

The fm module from IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6945
.. nonce: 9kD1K-
.. section: Library

The FL, flp, and fl modules from IRIX have been deprecated for removal in
Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6944
.. nonce: AYoVJR
.. section: Library

The FILE module on IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6943
.. nonce: CQ38ij
.. section: Library

The ERRNO module on IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6942
.. nonce: R-9YLH
.. section: Library

The DEVICE, GL, gl, and cgen modules (which indirectly includes cgensupport)
have been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6941
.. nonce: dKOF2g
.. section: Library

The CL, CL_old, and cl modules for IRIX have been deprecated for removal in
Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6940
.. nonce: 5cFkYd
.. section: Library

The cdplayer module for IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6939
.. nonce: 5y0yek
.. section: Library

The cddb module for IRIX has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6938
.. nonce: 0pHLuS
.. section: Library

The cd and CD modules for IRIX have been deprecated for removal in Python
3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6937
.. nonce: eF0f6O
.. section: Library

The al and AL modules for IRIX have been deprecated for removal in Python
3.0.

..

.. bpo: 1713041
.. date: 6936
.. nonce: JzsT_z
.. section: Library

fix pprint's handling of maximum depth.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6935
.. nonce: FpBuBP
.. section: Library

The timing module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6934
.. nonce: Lz9Ysd
.. section: Library

The sv module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6933
.. nonce: kwju7-
.. section: Library

The multifile module has been deprecated as per PEP 4.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6932
.. nonce: G-Cuj6
.. section: Library

The imageop module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 2250
.. date: 6931
.. nonce: v4HLiv
.. section: Library

Exceptions raised during evaluation of names in rlcompleter's
``Completer.complete()`` method are now caught and ignored.

..

.. bpo: 2659
.. date: 6930
.. nonce: FuhwDb
.. section: Library

Added ``break_on_hyphens`` option to textwrap TextWrapper class.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6929
.. nonce: w8Xvgj
.. section: Library

The mhlib module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6928
.. nonce: f4HWLF
.. section: Library

The linuxaudiodev module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6927
.. nonce: O9UJsR
.. section: Library

The ihooks module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6926
.. nonce: JFJhmk
.. section: Library

The fpformat module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6925
.. nonce: BVxyeG
.. section: Library

The dl module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6924
.. nonce: MCsyLJ
.. section: Library

The Canvas module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6923
.. nonce: aVjhm5
.. section: Library

The compiler package has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6922
.. nonce: R6-PB3
.. section: Library

The Bastion and rexec modules have been deprecated for removal in Python
3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6921
.. nonce: BvlchT
.. section: Library

The bsddb185 module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6920
.. nonce: Lt4pJF
.. section: Library

The pure module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 2487
.. date: 6919
.. nonce: n2AhZO
.. section: Library

change the semantics of math.ldexp(x, n) when n is too large to fit in a C
long.  ldexp(x, n) now returns a zero (with suitable sign) if n is large and
negative; previously, it raised OverflowError.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6918
.. nonce: 6I_VH_
.. section: Library

The toaiff module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6917
.. nonce: qWQme_
.. section: Library

The test.testall module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6916
.. nonce: HPixGU
.. section: Library

The new module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6915
.. nonce: sQ0aEE
.. section: Library

The user module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6914
.. nonce: J-y7uq
.. section: Library

The stringold module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6913
.. nonce: u1RhAc
.. section: Library

The mutex module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6912
.. nonce: NlWeSy
.. section: Library

The imputil module has been deprecated for removal in Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6911
.. nonce: iI_4rp
.. section: Library

test.test_support.catch_warning() gained a 'record' argument.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6910
.. nonce: 0DtsL9
.. section: Library

os.path.walk is deprecated in favor of os.walk.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6909
.. nonce: MWVgy8
.. section: Library

pdb gained the "until" command.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6908
.. nonce: R978mb
.. section: Library

The Mac Modules (including Carbon) have been deprecated for removal in
Python 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6907
.. nonce: 2hRfXS
.. section: Library

Library: on MacOS X you can now set ``ARCHFLAGS`` in the shell environment
to control the '-arch' flags that are used to build an extension. This was
added for compatibility with Apple's build of Python.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6906
.. nonce: HjodSi
.. section: Library

The bundled OSX-specific copy of libbffi is now in sync with the version
shipped with PyObjC 2.0 and includes support for x86_64 and ppc64 platforms.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6905
.. nonce: iTp3z3
.. section: Library

The threading module gained aliases for names that will be removed in the
3.x series.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6904
.. nonce: 0CBHNl
.. section: Build

The Windows installer now includes Tk 8.5, bzip2 1.0.5, and SQLite 3.5.9.

..

.. bpo: 1722225
.. date: 6903
.. nonce: j9OSPy
.. section: Build

Support QNX 6.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6902
.. nonce: CBo5JG
.. section: Build

``Lib/lib-old`` is now added to sys.path.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6901
.. nonce: sehDt_
.. section: Build

On MacOS X it is now possible to install the framework in 64-bit mode or
even as a 4-way universal binary (that is, PPC, i386, PPC64 and x86_64
support in one binary).

This is controlled by the configure argument ``--with-universal-archs``:

- ``--with-universal-archs=all``: install 4-way universal

- ``--with-universal-archs=32-bit``: install 2-way universal, 32-bit (the
default)

- ``--with-universal-archs=64-bit``: install 2-way universal, 64-bit

This option should be used in combination with ``--enable-universalsdk=``.

NOTE: 64-bit and 4-way builds are only suppported on Mac OS X 10.5 (or
later).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6900
.. nonce: dWsqLp
.. section: C API

Add ``PyType_Modified()`` as a public API to clear the type cache.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6899
.. nonce: kBP7ih
.. section: C API

The PyBytes functions have been renamed to PyByteArray.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6898
.. nonce: Ab5wDH
.. section: C API

The PyString functions have been renamed to PyBytes. A batch of defines were
added so that the linker still sees the original PyString names.
