.. bpo: 10221
.. date: 8273
.. nonce: 4NppnX
.. release date: 2010-11-13
.. section: Core and Builtins

dict.pop(k) now has a key error message that includes the missing key (same
message d[k] returns for missing keys).

..

.. bpo: 10125
.. date: 8272
.. nonce: Zs0ZsA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't segfault when the iterator passed to ``file.writelines()`` closes the
file.

..

.. bpo: 10186
.. date: 8271
.. nonce: _LgTkO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the SyntaxError caret when the offset is equal to the length of the
offending line.

..

.. bpo: 9997
.. date: 8270
.. nonce: mGq7Dd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't let the name "top" have special significance in scope resolution.

..

.. bpo: 9862
.. date: 8269
.. nonce: 18PjRQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compensate for broken PIPE_BUF in AIX by hard coding its value as the
default 512 when compiling on AIX.

..

.. bpo: 9675
.. date: 8268
.. nonce: grRY0l
.. section: Core and Builtins

CObject use is marked as a Py3k warning, not a deprecation warning.

..

.. bpo: 10068
.. date: 8267
.. nonce: CYBiNW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Global objects which have reference cycles with their module's dict are now
cleared again. This causes issue #7140 to appear again.

..

.. bpo: 9869
.. date: 8266
.. nonce: gwgHCl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make long() and PyNumber_Long return something of type long for a class
whose __long__ method returns a plain int.  This fixes an interpreter crash
when initializing an instance of a long subclass from an object whose
__long__ method returns a plain int.

..

.. bpo: 10006
.. date: 8265
.. nonce: QMA2kC
.. section: Core and Builtins

type.__abstractmethods__ now raises an AttributeError.

..

.. bpo: 9797
.. date: 8264
.. nonce: YxisFn
.. section: Core and Builtins

pystate.c wrongly assumed that zero couldn't be a valid thread-local storage
key.

..

.. bpo: 4947
.. date: 8263
.. nonce: abA0AT
.. section: Core and Builtins

The write() method of sys.stdout and sys.stderr uses their encoding and
errors attributes instead of using utf-8 in strict mode, to get the same
behaviour than the print statement.

..

.. bpo: 9737
.. date: 8262
.. nonce: JlusIM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when trying to delete a slice or an item from a memoryview
object.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8261
.. nonce: MI1h1F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore GIL in nis_cat in case of error.

..

.. bpo: 9688
.. date: 8260
.. nonce: PTAKBL
.. section: Core and Builtins

__basicsize__ and __itemsize__ must be accessed as Py_ssize_t.

..

.. bpo: 8530
.. date: 8259
.. nonce: 4OlxZq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent stringlib fastsearch from reading beyond the front of an array.

..

.. bpo: 83755
.. date: 8258
.. nonce: LFoGKM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implicit set-to-frozenset conversion was not thread-safe.

..

.. bpo: 9416
.. date: 8257
.. nonce: EqecrW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some issues with complex formatting where the output with no type
specifier failed to match the str output:

- format(complex(-0.0, 2.0), '-') omitted the real part from the output,   -
format(complex(0.0, 2.0), '-') included a sign and parentheses.

..

.. bpo: 7616
.. date: 8256
.. nonce: AOGmSj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix copying of overlapping memoryview slices with the Intel compiler.

..

.. bpo: 9926
.. date: 8255
.. nonce: J4BGGY
.. section: Library

Wrapped TestSuite subclass does not get __call__ executed

..

.. bpo: 4471
.. date: 8254
.. nonce: ZJDlrs
.. section: Library

Properly shutdown socket in IMAP.shutdown().  Patch by Lorenzo M. Catucci.

..

.. bpo: 10126
.. date: 8253
.. nonce: zvTZV-
.. section: Library

Fix distutils' test_build when Python was built with --enable-shared.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8252
.. nonce: NFeWRc
.. section: Library

Fix typo in one sdist option (medata-check).

..

.. bpo: 9199
.. date: 8251
.. nonce: 8WF_Pp
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect use of distutils.cmd.Command.announce.

..

.. bpo: 1718574
.. date: 8250
.. nonce: iqLV20
.. section: Library

Fix options that were supposed to accept arguments but did not in
build_clib.

..

.. bpo: 9281
.. date: 8249
.. nonce: 0xYNfM
.. section: Library

Prevent race condition with mkdir in distutils.  Patch by Arfrever.

..

.. bpo: 10229
.. date: 8248
.. nonce: 10oNS7
.. section: Library

Fix caching error in gettext.

..

.. bpo: 10252
.. date: 8247
.. nonce: pGhEYO
.. section: Library

Close file objects in a timely manner in distutils code and tests.  Patch by
Brian Brazil, completed by Éric Araujo.

..

.. bpo: 10311
.. date: 8246
.. nonce: u1t7up
.. section: Library

The signal module now restores errno before returning from its low-level
signal handler.  Patch by Hallvard B Furuseth.

..

.. bpo: 10038
.. date: 8245
.. nonce: 5EKcD7
.. section: Library

json.loads() on str should always return unicode (regression from Python
2.6).  Patch by Walter Dörwald.

..

.. bpo: 120176
.. date: 8244
.. nonce: 9k2NaP
.. section: Library

Wrapped TestSuite subclass does not get __call__ executed.

..

.. bpo: 6706
.. date: 8243
.. nonce: Es-Yrw
.. section: Library

asyncore accept() method no longer raises EWOULDBLOCK/ECONNABORTED on
incomplete connection attempt but returns None instead.

..

.. bpo: 10266
.. date: 8242
.. nonce: BZ9duO
.. section: Library

uu.decode didn't close in_file explicitly when it was given as a filename.
Patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 10246
.. date: 8241
.. nonce: NPG3oL
.. section: Library

uu.encode didn't close file objects explicitly when filenames were given to
it.  Patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 10253
.. date: 8240
.. nonce: TL1F90
.. section: Library

FileIO leaks a file descriptor when trying to open a file for append that
isn't seekable.  Patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 6105
.. date: 8239
.. nonce: qt9xTV
.. section: Library

json.dumps now respects OrderedDict's iteration order.

..

.. bpo: 9295
.. date: 8238
.. nonce: M7y0mB
.. section: Library

Fix a crash under Windows when calling close() on a file object with custom
buffering from two threads at once.

..

.. bpo: 5027
.. date: 8237
.. nonce: 6mYRNc
.. section: Library

The standard ``xml`` namespace is now understood by
xml.sax.saxutils.XMLGenerator as being bound to
http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace.  Patch by Troy J. Farrell.

..

.. bpo: 10163
.. date: 8236
.. nonce: Lrvd6I
.. section: Library

Skip unreadable registry keys during mimetypes initialization.

..

.. bpo: 5117
.. date: 8235
.. nonce: FzD7qd
.. section: Library

Fixed root directory related issue on posixpath.relpath() and
ntpath.relpath().

..

.. bpo: 9409
.. date: 8234
.. nonce: HRnhHT
.. section: Library

Fix the regex to match all kind of filenames, for interactive debugging in
doctests.

..

.. bpo: 6612
.. date: 8233
.. nonce: qaqnnh
.. section: Library

Fix site and sysconfig to catch os.getcwd() error, eg. if the current
directory was deleted. Patch written by W. Trevor King.

..

.. bpo: 10045
.. date: 8232
.. nonce: iz6KpQ
.. section: Library

Improved performance when writing after seeking past the end of the "file"
in cStringIO.

..

.. bpo: 9948
.. date: 8231
.. nonce: FOv8kp
.. section: Library

Fixed problem of losing filename case information.

..

.. bpo: 9437
.. date: 8230
.. nonce: a95HEb
.. section: Library

Fix building C extensions with non-default LDFLAGS.

..

.. bpo: 9759
.. date: 8229
.. nonce: aGsQic
.. section: Library

GzipFile now raises ValueError when an operation is attempted after the file
is closed.  Patch by Jeffrey Finkelstein.

..

.. bpo: 9042
.. date: 8228
.. nonce: dQTK_C
.. section: Library

Fix interaction of custom translation classes and caching in gettext.

..

.. bpo: 9065
.. date: 8227
.. nonce: PTsv6_
.. section: Library

tarfile no longer uses "root" as the default for the uname and gname field.

..

.. bpo: 1050268
.. date: 8226
.. nonce: oOtGVD
.. section: Library

parseaddr now correctly quotes double quote and backslash characters that
appear inside quoted strings in email addresses.

..

.. bpo: 10004
.. date: 8225
.. nonce: NTY_zM
.. section: Library

quoprimime no longer generates a traceback when confronted with invalid
characters after '=' in a Q-encoded word.

..

.. bpo: 9950
.. date: 8224
.. nonce: omOgj_
.. section: Library

Fix socket.sendall() crash or misbehaviour when a signal is received.  Now
sendall() properly calls signal handlers if necessary, and retries sending
if these returned successfully, including on sockets with a timeout.

..

.. bpo: 9947
.. date: 8223
.. nonce: YCbARo
.. section: Library

logging: Fixed locking bug in stopListening.

..

.. bpo: 9945
.. date: 8222
.. nonce: DTIygY
.. section: Library

logging: Fixed locking bugs in addHandler/removeHandler.

..

.. bpo: 9936
.. date: 8221
.. nonce: evd1vv
.. section: Library

Fixed executable lines' search in the trace module.

..

.. bpo: 9928
.. date: 8220
.. nonce: S5LHD8
.. section: Library

Properly initialize the types exported by the bz2 module.

..

.. bpo: 9854
.. date: 8219
.. nonce: DxDKln
.. section: Library

The default read() implementation in io.RawIOBase now handles non-blocking
readinto() returning None correctly.

..

.. bpo: 9729
.. date: 8218
.. nonce: mSCrBH
.. section: Library

Fix the signature of SSLSocket.recvfrom() and SSLSocket.sendto() to match
the corresponding socket methods.  Also, fix various SSLSocket methods to
raise socket.error rather than an unhelpful TypeError when called on an
unconnected socket.  Original patch by Andrew Bennetts.

..

.. bpo: 9826
.. date: 8217
.. nonce: OHvlzj
.. section: Library

OrderedDict.__repr__ can now handle self-referential values:   d['x'] = d.

..

.. bpo: 767645
.. date: 8216
.. nonce: YgbDPp
.. section: Library

Set os.path.supports_unicode_filenames to True on Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 9837
.. date: 8215
.. nonce: EZowT2
.. section: Library

The read() method of ZipExtFile objects (as returned by ZipFile.open())
could return more bytes than requested.

..

.. bpo: 9825
.. date: 8214
.. nonce: MVYNUl
.. section: Library

removed __del__ from the definition of collections.OrderedDict. This
prevents user-created self-referencing ordered dictionaries from becoming
permanently uncollectable GC garbage.  The downside is that removing __del__
means that the internal doubly-linked list has to wait for GC collection
rather than freeing memory immediately when the refcnt drops to zero.

..

.. bpo: 9816
.. date: 8213
.. nonce: jOgfeD
.. section: Library

random.Random.jumpahead(n) did not produce a sufficiently different internal
state for small values of n.  Fixed by salting the value.

..

.. bpo: 9792
.. date: 8212
.. nonce: 6d8KN7
.. section: Library

In case of connection failure, socket.create_connection() would swallow the
exception and raise a new one, making it impossible to fetch the original
errno, or to filter timeout errors.  Now the original error is re-raised.

..

.. bpo: 9758
.. date: 8211
.. nonce: bTCX3s
.. section: Library

When fcntl.ioctl() was called with mutable_flag set to True, and the passed
buffer was exactly 1024 bytes long, the buffer wouldn't be updated back
after the system call.  Original patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 1100562
.. date: 8210
.. nonce: w61Crx
.. section: Library

Fix deep-copying of objects derived from the list and dict types.  Patch by
Michele Orrù and Björn Lindqvist.

..

.. bpo: 7005
.. date: 8209
.. nonce: MVOzyL
.. section: Library

Fixed output of None values for RawConfigParser.write and
ConfigParser.write.

..

.. bpo: 808164
.. date: 8208
.. nonce: P5YO_B
.. section: Library

Fixed socket.close to avoid references to globals, to avoid issues when
socket.close is called from a __del__ method.

..

.. bpo: 2986
.. date: 8207
.. nonce: BeBn_s
.. section: Library

difflib.SequenceMatcher gets a new parameter, autojunk, which can be set to
False to turn off the previously undocumented 'popularity' heuristic. Patch
by Terry Reedy and Eli Bendersky

..

.. bpo: 8797
.. date: 8206
.. nonce: IkQxYA
.. section: Library

urllib2 does a retry for Basic Authentication failure instead of falling
into recursion.

..

.. bpo: 1194222
.. date: 8205
.. nonce: UXCJLq
.. section: Library

email.utils.parsedate now returns RFC2822 compliant four character years
even if the message contains RFC822 two character years.

..

.. bpo: 8750
.. date: 8204
.. nonce: ldqODt
.. section: Library

Fixed MutableSet's methods to correctly handle reflexive operations, namely
x -= x and x ^= x.

..

.. bpo: 9129
.. date: 8203
.. nonce: AYXAAf
.. section: Library

smtpd.py is vulnerable to DoS attacks deriving from missing error handling
when accepting a new connection.

..

.. bpo: 658749
.. date: 8202
.. nonce: THL2I_
.. section: Library

asyncore's connect() method now correctly interprets winsock errors.

..

.. bpo: 9501
.. date: 8201
.. nonce: G-M-pc
.. section: Library

Fixed logging regressions in cleanup code.

..

.. bpo: 9214
.. date: 8200
.. nonce: j1o-Zo
.. section: Library

Set operations on KeysView or ItemsView in the collections module now
correctly return a set.  (Patch by Eli Bendersky.)

..

.. bpo: 9617
.. date: 8199
.. nonce: blJoL4
.. section: Library

Signals received during a low-level write operation aren't ignored by the
buffered IO layer anymore.

..

.. bpo: 2521
.. date: 8198
.. nonce: iTl7ZU
.. section: Library

Use weakrefs on for caching in the abc module, so that classes are not held
onto after they are deleted elsewhere.

..

.. bpo: 9626
.. date: 8197
.. nonce: Vowb6X
.. section: Library

the view methods for collections.OrderedDict() were returning the unordered
versions inherited from dict.  Those methods are now overridden to provide
ordered views.

..

.. bpo: 8688
.. date: 8196
.. nonce: fFdtWn
.. section: Library

MANIFEST files created by distutils now include a magic comment indicating
they are generated.  Manually maintained MANIFESTs without this marker will
not be overwritten or removed.

..

.. bpo: 7467
.. date: 8195
.. nonce: 2aq5Vk
.. section: Library

when reading a file from a ZIP archive, its CRC is checked and a BadZipfile
error is raised if it doesn't match (as used to be the case in Python 2.5
and earlier).

..

.. bpo: 9550
.. date: 8194
.. nonce: gz0PSS
.. section: Library

a BufferedReader could issue an additional read when the original read
request had been satisfied, which could block indefinitely when the
underlying raw IO channel was e.g. a socket.  Report and original patch by
Jason V. Miller.

..

.. bpo: 9551
.. date: 8193
.. nonce: 2q2VFJ
.. section: Library

Don't raise TypeError when setting the value to None for SafeConfigParser
instances constructed with allow_no_value == True.

..

.. bpo: 6915
.. date: 8192
.. nonce: Nh2L6-
.. section: Library

Under Windows, os.listdir() didn't release the Global Interpreter Lock
around all system calls.  Original patch by Ryan Kelly.

..

.. bpo: 3757
.. date: 8191
.. nonce: Dfue1t
.. section: Library

thread-local objects now support cyclic garbage collection. Thread-local
objects involved in reference cycles will be deallocated timely by the
cyclic GC, even if the underlying thread is still running.

..

.. bpo: 6231
.. date: 8190
.. nonce: fvS6jF
.. section: Library

Fix xml.etree.ElementInclude to include the tail of the current node.

..

.. bpo: 6869
.. date: 8189
.. nonce: SI1hyJ
.. section: Library

Fix a refcount problem in the _ctypes extension.

..

.. bpo: 5504
.. date: 8188
.. nonce: DyvVKo
.. section: Library

ctypes should now work with systems where mmap can't be PROT_WRITE and
PROT_EXEC.

..

.. bpo: 8280
.. date: 8187
.. nonce: PrpMXx
.. section: Library

urllib2's Request method will remove fragements in the url. This is how it
is supposed to work, wget and curl do the same.  Previous behavior was
wrong.

..

.. bpo: 2944
.. date: 8186
.. nonce: uva4MG
.. section: Library

asyncore doesn't handle connection refused correctly.

..

.. bpo: 3196
.. date: 8185
.. nonce: oFknaj
.. section: Library

email header decoding is now forgiving if an RFC2047 encoded word encoded in
base64 is lacking padding.

..

.. bpo: 9444
.. date: 8184
.. nonce: KdKxOB
.. section: Library

Argparse now uses the first element of prefix_chars as the option character
for the added 'h/help' option if prefix_chars does not contain a '-',
instead of raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 9354
.. date: 8183
.. nonce: 4mGRrJ
.. section: Library

Provide getsockopt() in asyncore's file_wrapper.

..

.. bpo: 9428
.. date: 8182
.. nonce: 0pea6y
.. section: Library

Fix running scripts with the profile/cProfile modules from the command line.

..

.. bpo: 7781
.. date: 8181
.. nonce: qJIM6S
.. section: Library

Fix restricting stats by entry counts in the pstats interactive browser.

..

.. bpo: 9209
.. date: 8180
.. nonce: q5h2aM
.. section: Library

Do not crash in the pstats interactive browser on invalid regular
expressions.

..

.. bpo: 7372
.. date: 8179
.. nonce: bjWkFm
.. section: Library

Fix pstats regression when stripping paths from profile data generated with
the profile module.

..

.. bpo: 4108
.. date: 8178
.. nonce: SGW4tp
.. section: Library

In urllib.robotparser, if there are multiple 'User-agent: *' entries,
consider the first one.

..

.. bpo: 8397
.. date: 8177
.. nonce: xNl1c0
.. section: Library

Raise an error when attempting to mix iteration and regular reads on a
BZ2File object, rather than returning incorrect results.

..

.. bpo: 5294
.. date: 8176
.. nonce: OW1qhg
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of pdb's "continue" command when called in the top-level
debugged frame.

..

.. bpo: 5727
.. date: 8175
.. nonce: sYm_N8
.. section: Library

Restore the ability to use readline when calling into pdb in doctests.

..

.. bpo: 6719
.. date: 8174
.. nonce: _9t4CD
.. section: Library

In pdb, do not stop somewhere in the encodings machinery if the source file
to be debugged is in a non-builtin encoding.

..

.. bpo: 8048
.. date: 8173
.. nonce: UMKE5S
.. section: Library

Prevent doctests from failing when sys.displayhook has been reassigned.

..

.. bpo: 8015
.. date: 8172
.. nonce: YNaP75
.. section: Library

In pdb, do not crash when an empty line is entered as a breakpoint command.

..

.. bpo: 9448
.. date: 8171
.. nonce: UD0blh
.. section: Library

Fix a leak of OS resources (mutexes or semaphores) when re-initializing a
buffered IO object by calling its ``__init__`` method.

..

.. bpo: 7909
.. date: 8170
.. nonce: KNWthV
.. section: Library

Do not touch paths with the special prefixes ``\\.\`` or ``\\?\`` in
ntpath.normpath().

..

.. bpo: 5146
.. date: 8169
.. nonce: f9NwCU
.. section: Library

Handle UID THREAD command correctly in imaplib.

..

.. bpo: 5147
.. date: 8168
.. nonce: ANusbF
.. section: Library

Fix the header generated for cookie files written by
http.cookiejar.MozillaCookieJar.

..

.. bpo: 8198
.. date: 8167
.. nonce: WrGm2c
.. section: Library

In pydoc, output all help text to the correct stream when sys.stdout is
reassigned.

..

.. bpo: 7395
.. date: 8166
.. nonce: FkZk7v
.. section: Library

Fix tracebacks in pstats interactive browser.

..

.. bpo: 8230
.. date: 8165
.. nonce: pBkzM8
.. section: Library

Fix Lib/test/sortperf.py.

..

.. bpo: 1713
.. date: 8164
.. nonce: fknkI-
.. section: Library

Fix os.path.ismount(), which returned true for symbolic links across
devices.

..

.. bpo: 8826
.. date: 8163
.. nonce: PcQ9NA
.. section: Library

Properly load old-style "expires" attribute in http.cookies.

..

.. bpo: 1690103
.. date: 8162
.. nonce: 5tT47_
.. section: Library

Fix initial namespace for code run with trace.main().

..

.. bpo: 8471
.. date: 8161
.. nonce: RqN6fc
.. section: Library

In doctest, properly reset the output stream to an empty string when Unicode
was previously output.

..

.. bpo: 8620
.. date: 8160
.. nonce: qQR7E1
.. section: Library

when a Cmd is fed input that reaches EOF without a final newline, it no
longer truncates the last character of the last command line.

..

.. bpo: 6213
.. date: 8159
.. nonce: oyAtZ0
.. section: Library

Implement getstate() and setstate() methods of utf-8-sig and utf-16
incremental encoders.

..

.. bpo: 7113
.. date: 8158
.. nonce: vO-_y8
.. section: Library

Speed up loading in ConfigParser. Patch by Łukasz Langa.

..

.. bpo: 3704
.. date: 8157
.. nonce: UbuUn3
.. section: Library

cookielib was not properly handling URLs with a / in the parameters.

..

.. bpo: 9032
.. date: 8156
.. nonce: zX39th
.. section: Library

XML-RPC client retries the request on EPIPE error. The EPIPE error occurs
when the server closes the socket and the client sends a big XML-RPC
request.

..

.. bpo: 5542
.. date: 8155
.. nonce: v5vo1o
.. section: Library

Remove special logic that closes HTTPConnection socket on EPIPE.

..

.. bpo: 4629
.. date: 8154
.. nonce: warUcf
.. section: Library

getopt raises an error if an argument ends with = whereas getopt doesn't
except a value (eg. --help= is rejected if getopt uses ['help='] long
options).

..

.. bpo: 7895
.. date: 8153
.. nonce: citB4G
.. section: Library

platform.mac_ver() no longer crashes after calling os.fork()

..

.. bpo: 5395
.. date: 8152
.. nonce: _AaZih
.. section: Library

array.fromfile() would raise a spurious EOFError when an I/O error occurred.
Now an IOError is raised instead.  Patch by chuck (Jan Hosang).

..

.. bpo: 7646
.. date: 8151
.. nonce: af6LG8
.. section: Library

The fnmatch pattern cache no longer grows without bound.

..

.. bpo: 9136
.. date: 8150
.. nonce: GFQg0c
.. section: Library

Fix 'dictionary changed size during iteration' RuntimeError produced when
profiling the decimal module.  This was due to a dangerous iteration over
'locals()' in Context.__init__.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8149
.. nonce: aX1_fT
.. section: Library

Fix extreme speed issue in Decimal.pow when the base is an exact power of 10
and the exponent is tiny (for example, Decimal(10) **
Decimal('1e-999999999')).

..

.. bpo: 9161
.. date: 8148
.. nonce: 8Az_aI
.. section: Library

Fix regression in optparse's acceptance of unicode strings in add_option
calls.

..

.. bpo: 9130
.. date: 8147
.. nonce: cB_z-D
.. section: Library

Fix validation of relative imports in parser module.

..

.. bpo: 9128
.. date: 8146
.. nonce: 2OKBVh
.. section: Library

Fix validation of class decorators in parser module.

..

.. bpo: 9164
.. date: 8145
.. nonce: SK5COV
.. section: Library

Ensure sysconfig handles dupblice archs while building on OSX

..

.. bpo: 9315
.. date: 8144
.. nonce: cZkTvS
.. section: Library

Fix for the trace module to record correct class name for tracing methods.

..

.. bpo: 9054
.. date: 8143
.. nonce: UkA-OR
.. section: Library

Fix a crash occurring when using the pyexpat module with expat version
2.0.1.

..

.. bpo: 10003
.. date: 8142
.. nonce: AzaOdd
.. section: Library

Allow handling of SIGBREAK on Windows. Fixes a regression introduced by
issue #9324.

..

.. bpo: 8734
.. date: 8141
.. nonce: f1CtFi
.. section: Library

Avoid crash in msvcrt.get_osfhandle() when an invalid file descriptor is
provided.  Patch by Pascal Chambon.

..

.. bpo: 7736
.. date: 8140
.. nonce: 7n0AS1
.. section: Library

Release the GIL around calls to opendir() and closedir() in the posix
module.  Patch by Marcin Bachry.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8139
.. nonce: Z5wyzY
.. section: Library

As a result of issue #2521, the _weakref module is now compiled into the
interpreter by default.

..

.. bpo: 9324
.. date: 8138
.. nonce: c_m8af
.. section: Library

Add parameter validation to signal.signal on Windows in order to prevent
crashes.

..

.. bpo: 9526
.. date: 8137
.. nonce: 8aO189
.. section: Library

Remove some outdated (int) casts that were preventing the array module from
working correctly with arrays of more than 2**31 elements.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8136
.. nonce: yfc3zR
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in ssl._ssl._test_decode_cert.

..

.. bpo: 8065
.. date: 8135
.. nonce: c5wBHe
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in readline module (from failure to free the result of
history_get_history_state()).

..

.. bpo: 9450
.. date: 8134
.. nonce: 16iwLn
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in readline.replace_history_item and
readline.remove_history_item for readline version >= 5.0.

..

.. bpo: 8105
.. date: 8133
.. nonce: GM5E7v
.. section: Library

Validate file descriptor passed to mmap.mmap on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 1019882
.. date: 8132
.. nonce: VnQ_2J
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError when loading certain hotshot stats.

..

.. bpo: 9422
.. date: 8131
.. nonce: MWxuZj
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak when re-initializing a struct.Struct object.

..

.. bpo: 7900
.. date: 8130
.. nonce: s8mvNz
.. section: Library

The getgroups(2) system call on MacOSX behaves rather oddly compared to
other unix systems. In particular, os.getgroups() does not reflect any
changes made using os.setgroups() but basically always returns the same
information as the id command.

os.getgroups() can now return more than 16 groups on MacOSX.

..

.. bpo: 9277
.. date: 8129
.. nonce: yRnO3Z
.. section: Library

Fix bug in struct.pack for bools in standard mode (e.g., struct.pack('>?')):
if conversion to bool raised an exception then that exception wasn't
properly propagated on machines where char is unsigned.

..

.. bpo: 7567
.. date: 8128
.. nonce: hujTBu
.. section: Library

Don't call `setupterm' twice.

..

.. bpo: 7287
.. date: 8127
.. nonce: 6G503Q
.. section: Tools/Demos

Demo/imputil/knee.py was removed.

..

.. bpo: 9188
.. date: 8126
.. nonce: XIcIjV
.. section: Tools/Demos

The gdb extension now handles correctly narrow (UCS2) as well as wide (UCS4)
unicode builds for both the host interpreter (embedded inside gdb) and the
interpreter under test.

..

.. bpo: 8852
.. date: 8125
.. nonce: WD9-r5
.. section: Build

Allow the socket module to build on OpenSolaris.

..

.. bpo: 10054
.. date: 8124
.. nonce: Pi5IJn
.. section: Build

Some platforms provide uintptr_t in inttypes.h.  Patch by Akira Kitada.

..

.. bpo: 10055
.. date: 8123
.. nonce: xfTPZn
.. section: Build

Make json C89-compliant in UCS4 mode.

..

.. bpo: 1633863
.. date: 8122
.. nonce: 08O8Og
.. section: Build

Don't ignore $CC under AIX.

..

.. bpo: 9810
.. date: 8121
.. nonce: JACTWC
.. section: Build

Compile bzip2 source files in python's project file directly. It used to be
built with bzip2's makefile.

..

.. bpo: 941346
.. date: 8120
.. nonce: 4aE21V
.. section: Build

Improve the build process under AIX and allow Python to be built as a shared
library.  Patch by Sébastien Sablé.

..

.. bpo: 4026
.. date: 8119
.. nonce: 2Kz_uL
.. section: Build

Make the fcntl extension build under AIX.  Patch by Sébastien Sablé.

..

.. bpo: 3101
.. date: 8118
.. nonce: zq3p0s
.. section: Build

Helper functions _add_one_to_index_C() and _add_one_to_index_F() become
_Py_add_one_to_index_C() and _Py_add_one_to_index_F(), respectively.

..

.. bpo: 9700
.. date: 8117
.. nonce: tC4cof
.. section: Build

define HAVE_BROKEN_POSIX_SEMAPHORES under AIX 6.x.  Patch by Sébastien
Sablé.

..

.. bpo: 9280
.. date: 8116
.. nonce: 2PISFF
.. section: Build

Make sharedinstall depend on sharedmods.

..

.. bpo: 9275
.. date: 8115
.. nonce: DcFin-
.. section: Build

The OSX installer once again installs links to binaries in
``/usr/local/bin``.

..

.. bpo: 9392
.. date: 8114
.. nonce: aY7w6w
.. section: Build

A framework build on OSX will once again use a versioned name of the
``2to3`` tool, that is you can use ``2to3-2.7`` to select the Python 2.7
edition of 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 9701
.. date: 8113
.. nonce: hgaEU8
.. section: Build

The MacOSX installer can patch the shell profile to ensure that the "bin"
directory inside the framework is on the shell's search path. This feature
now also supports the ZSH shell.

..

.. bpo: 7473
.. date: 8112
.. nonce: NuS196
.. section: Build

avoid link errors when building a framework with a different set of
architectures than the one that is currently installed.

..

.. bpo: 9978
.. date: 8111
.. nonce: PgNzKW
.. section: Tests

Wait until subprocess completes initialization. (Win32KillTests in test_os)

..

.. bpo: 9894
.. date: 8110
.. nonce: 9cw69_
.. section: Tests

Do not hardcode ENOENT in test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 9323
.. date: 8109
.. nonce: qAJ8-i
.. section: Tests

Make test.regrtest.__file__ absolute, this was not always the case when
running profile or trace, for example.

..

.. bpo: 9315
.. date: 8108
.. nonce: f1i0qq
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the trace module.  Patch by Eli Bendersky.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8107
.. nonce: AVwNn9
.. section: Tests

Strengthen test_unicode with explicit type checking for assertEqual tests.

..

.. bpo: 8857
.. date: 8106
.. nonce: Hy6Qmf
.. section: Tests

Provide a test case for socket.getaddrinfo.

..

.. bpo: 7564
.. date: 8105
.. nonce: ps-pN3
.. section: Tests

Skip test_ioctl if another process is attached to /dev/tty.

..

.. bpo: 8433
.. date: 8104
.. nonce: kMuB7u
.. section: Tests

Fix test_curses failure with newer versions of ncurses.

..

.. bpo: 9496
.. date: 8103
.. nonce: UDIGR0
.. section: Tests

Provide a test suite for the rlcompleter module.  Patch by Michele Orrù.

..

.. bpo: 8605
.. date: 8102
.. nonce: jxIp6Y
.. section: Tests

Skip test_gdb if Python is compiled with optimizations.

..

.. bpo: 9568
.. date: 8101
.. nonce: OoJYE5
.. section: Tests

Fix test_urllib2_localnet on OS X 10.3.

..

.. bpo: 9817
.. date: 8100
.. nonce: sk3Q3T
.. section: Documentation

Add expat COPYING file; add expat, libffi and expat licenses to
Doc/license.rst.

..

.. bpo: 9524
.. date: 8099
.. nonce: Es25xw
.. section: Documentation

Document that two CTRL* signals are meant for use only with os.kill.

..

.. bpo: 9255
.. date: 8098
.. nonce: tp81US
.. section: Documentation

Document that the 'test' package is for internal Python use only.

..

.. bpo: 7829
.. date: 8097
.. nonce: o1BLF0
.. section: Documentation

Document in dis that bytecode is an implementation detail.
