.. bpo: 9670
.. date: 8461
.. nonce: D4p50W
.. release date: 2011-05-29
.. section: Core and Builtins

Increase the default stack size for secondary threads on Mac OS X and
FreeBSD to reduce the chances of a crash instead of a "maximum recursion
depth" RuntimeError exception. (patch by Ronald Oussoren)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8460
.. nonce: w122h9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correct lookup of __dir__ on objects. This allows old-style classes to have
__dir__. It also causes errors besides AttributeError found on lookup to be
propagated.

..

.. bpo: 1195
.. date: 8459
.. nonce: rUvlec
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix input() if it is interrupted by CTRL+d and then CTRL+c, clear the
end-of-file indicator after CTRL+d.

..

.. bpo: 8651
.. date: 8458
.. nonce: KT0VWy
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyArg_Parse*() functions raise an OverflowError if the file doesn't have
PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN define and the size doesn't fit in an int (length bigger
than 2^31-1 bytes).

..

.. bpo: 8651
.. date: 8457
.. nonce: d-KV9c
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix "z#" format of PyArg_Parse*() function: the size was not written if
PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN is defined.

..

.. bpo: 9756
.. date: 8456
.. nonce: L962XN
.. section: Core and Builtins

When calling a method descriptor or a slot wrapper descriptor, the check of
the object type doesn't read the __class__ attribute anymore. Fix a crash if
a class override its __class__ attribute (e.g. a proxy of the str type).
Patch written by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 10517
.. date: 8455
.. nonce: eHRgPe
.. section: Core and Builtins

After fork(), reinitialize the TLS used by the PyGILState_* APIs, to avoid a
crash with the pthread implementation in RHEL 5.  Patch by Charles-François
Natali.

..

.. bpo: 6780
.. date: 8454
.. nonce: MS1yFK
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix starts/endswith error message to mention that tuples are accepted too.

..

.. bpo: 5057
.. date: 8453
.. nonce: BMmS2n
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix a bug in the peepholer that led to non-portable pyc files between narrow
and wide builds while optimizing BINARY_SUBSCR on non-BMP chars (e.g.
u"\U00012345"[0]).

..

.. bpo: 11650
.. date: 8452
.. nonce: r47Jvk
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyOS_StdioReadline() retries fgets() if it was interrupted (EINTR), for
example if the program is stopped with CTRL+z on Mac OS X. Patch written by
Charles-Francois Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11144
.. date: 8451
.. nonce: FE1cYC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that int(a_float) returns an int whenever possible. Previously, there
were some corner cases where a long was returned even though the result was
within the range of an int.

..

.. bpo: 11450
.. date: 8450
.. nonce: ulI9xJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't truncate hg version info in Py_GetBuildInfo() when there are many tags
(e.g. when using mq).  Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 10451
.. date: 8449
.. nonce: wlYiI8
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview objects could allow mutating a readable buffer. Initial patch by
Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 10892
.. date: 8448
.. nonce: ATjwD_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't segfault when trying to delete __abstractmethods__ from a class.

..

.. bpo: 8020
.. date: 8447
.. nonce: aERuZE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid a crash where the small objects allocator would read non-Python
managed memory while it is being modified by another thread. Patch by Matt
Bandy.

..

.. bpo: 11004
.. date: 8446
.. nonce: 2Wj4t8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Repaired edge case in deque.count().

..

.. bpo: 8278
.. date: 8445
.. nonce: 8P-kMi
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Windows and with a NTFS filesystem, os.stat() and os.utime() can now
handle dates after 2038.

..

.. bpo: 4236
.. date: 8444
.. nonce: kMjQK6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Py_InitModule4 now checks the import machinery directly rather than the
Py_IsInitialized flag, avoiding a Fatal Python error in certain
circumstances when an import is done in __del__.

..

.. bpo: 11828
.. date: 8443
.. nonce: nBlnst
.. section: Core and Builtins

startswith and endswith don't accept None as slice index. Patch by Torsten
Becker.

..

.. bpo: 10674
.. date: 8442
.. nonce: ZNFQ1f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove unused 'dictmaker' rule from grammar.

..

.. bpo: 10596
.. date: 8441
.. nonce: r05xzm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix float.__mod__ to have the same behaviour as float.__divmod__ with
respect to signed zeros.  -4.0 % 4.0 should be 0.0, not -0.0.

..

.. bpo: 11386
.. date: 8440
.. nonce: wrrB8K
.. section: Core and Builtins

bytearray.pop() now throws IndexError when the bytearray is empty, instead
of OverflowError.

..

.. bpo: 12161
.. date: 8439
.. nonce: CmDpNV
.. section: Library

Cause StringIO.getvalue() to raise a ValueError when used on a closed
StringIO instance.

..

.. bpo: 12182
.. date: 8438
.. nonce: IWruZQ
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.HTMLDoc.multicolumn() if Python uses the new (true) division
(python -Qnew). Patch written by Ralf W. Grosse-Kunstleve.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 8437
.. nonce: 9M55CV
.. section: Library

RawIOBase.readall() now returns None if read() returns None.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 8436
.. nonce: U3k4iw
.. section: Library

FileIO.readall() now raises a ValueError instead of an IOError if the file
is closed.

..

.. bpo: 1441530
.. date: 8435
.. nonce: pSlnFk
.. section: Library

In imaplib, use makefile() to wrap the SSL socket to avoid heap
fragmentation and MemoryError with some malloc implementations.

..

.. bpo: 12100
.. date: 8434
.. nonce: 4sb-gJ
.. section: Library

Don't reset incremental encoders of CJK codecs at each call to their
encode() method anymore, but continue to call the reset() method if the
final argument is True.

..

.. bpo: 12124
.. date: 8433
.. nonce: qpMI7g
.. section: Library

zipimport doesn't keep a reference to zlib.decompress() anymore to be able
to unload the module.

..

.. bpo: 10154
.. date: 8432
.. nonce: 4iPVr8
.. section: Library

change the normalization of UTF-8 to "UTF-8" instead of "UTF8" in the locale
module as the latter is not supported MacOSX and OpenBSD. (See also:
bpo-10090)

..

.. bpo: 9516
.. date: 8431
.. nonce: WLkxuC
.. section: Library

avoid errors in sysconfig when MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET is set in shell.

..

.. bpo: 12050
.. date: 8430
.. nonce: v6HF9i
.. section: Library

zlib.decompressobj().decompress() now clears the unconsumed_tail attribute
when called without a max_length argument.

..

.. bpo: 12062
.. date: 8429
.. nonce: fUVuyO
.. section: Library

In the `io` module, fix a flushing bug when doing a certain type of I/O
sequence on a file opened in read+write mode (namely: reading, seeking a bit
forward, writing, then seeking before the previous write but still within
buffered data, and writing again).

..

.. bpo: 8498
.. date: 8428
.. nonce: XooGVI
.. section: Library

In socket.accept(), allow specifying 0 as a backlog value in order to accept
exactly one connection.  Patch by Daniel Evers.

..

.. bpo: 12012
.. date: 8427
.. nonce: raFUoR
.. section: Library

ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv2 becomes optional.

..

.. bpo: 11927
.. date: 8426
.. nonce: UqvRAV
.. section: Library

SMTP_SSL now uses port 465 by default as documented.  Patch by Kasun Herath.

..

.. bpo: 11999
.. date: 8425
.. nonce: aLa-HD
.. section: Library

fixed sporadic sync failure mailbox.Maildir due to its trying to detect
mtime changes by comparing to the system clock instead of to the previous
value of the mtime.

..

.. bpo: 10684
.. date: 8424
.. nonce: Ctye6o
.. section: Library

shutil.move used to delete a folder on case insensitive filesystems when the
source and destination name where the same except for the case.

..

.. bpo: 11982
.. date: 8423
.. nonce: 4CiHRO
.. section: Library

fix json.loads('""') to return u'' rather than ''.

..

.. bpo: 11277
.. date: 8422
.. nonce: 4nCUxv
.. section: Library

mmap.mmap() calls fcntl(fd, F_FULLFSYNC) on Mac OS X to get around a mmap
bug with sparse files. Patch written by Steffen Daode Nurpmeso.

..

.. bpo: 10761
.. date: 8421
.. nonce: rwSQE7
.. section: Library

Fix tarfile.extractall failure when symlinked files are present. Initial
patch by Scott Leerssen.

..

.. bpo: 11763
.. date: 8420
.. nonce: LPGrnG
.. section: Library

don't use difflib in TestCase.assertMultiLineEqual if the strings are too
long.

..

.. bpo: 11236
.. date: 8419
.. nonce: DyWdnL
.. section: Library

getpass.getpass responds to ctrl-c or ctrl-z on terminal.

..

.. bpo: 11768
.. date: 8418
.. nonce: HRg5Hy
.. section: Library

The signal handler of the signal module only calls Py_AddPendingCall() for
the first signal to fix a deadlock on reentrant or parallel calls.
PyErr_SetInterrupt() writes also into the wake up file.

..

.. bpo: 11875
.. date: 8417
.. nonce: xFn-yD
.. section: Library

collections.OrderedDict's __reduce__ was temporarily mutating the object
instead of just working on a copy.

..

.. bpo: 11442
.. date: 8416
.. nonce: Jta8go
.. section: Library

Add a charset parameter to the Content-type in SimpleHTTPServer to avoid XSS
attacks.

..

.. bpo: 11467
.. date: 8415
.. nonce: th8B0N
.. section: Library

Fix urlparse behavior when handling urls which contains scheme specific part
only digits. Patch by Santoso Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8414
.. nonce: MOd782
.. section: Library

collections.Counter().copy() now works correctly for subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 11474
.. date: 8413
.. nonce: UKTAWA
.. section: Library

Fix the bug with url2pathname() handling of '/C|/' on Windows. Patch by
Santoso Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 9233
.. date: 8412
.. nonce: AIRcqi
.. section: Library

Fix json.loads('{}') to return a dict (instead of a list), when _json is not
available.

..

.. bpo: 11703
.. date: 8411
.. nonce: hwI5Mw
.. section: Library

urllib2.geturl() does not return correct url when the original url contains
#fragment.

..

.. bpo: 10019
.. date: 8410
.. nonce: J7QVFU
.. section: Library

Fixed regression in json module where an indent of 0 stopped adding newlines
and acted instead like 'None'.

..

.. bpo: 5162
.. date: 8409
.. nonce: UYJrO-
.. section: Library

Treat services like frozen executables to allow child spawning from
multiprocessing.forking on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 4877
.. date: 8408
.. nonce: 4B7uDJ
.. section: Library

Fix a segfault in xml.parsers.expat while attempting to parse a closed file.

..

.. bpo: 11830
.. date: 8407
.. nonce: tFEtWl
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary introspection code in the decimal module. It was causing
a failed import in the Turkish locale where the locale sensitive str.upper()
method caused a name mismatch.

..

.. bpo: 8428
.. date: 8406
.. nonce: vVu7J6
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in multiprocessing.Pool when terminating worker
processes: new processes would be spawned while the pool is being shut down.
Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 7311
.. date: 8405
.. nonce: lRokCQ
.. section: Library

Fix HTMLParser to accept non-ASCII attribute values.

..

.. bpo: 10963
.. date: 8404
.. nonce: _J-MW9
.. section: Library

Ensure that subprocess.communicate() never raises EPIPE.

..

.. bpo: 11662
.. date: 8403
.. nonce: GpHbgk
.. section: Library

Make urllib and urllib2 ignore redirections if the scheme is not HTTP, HTTPS
or FTP (CVE-2011-1521).

..

.. bpo: 11256
.. date: 8402
.. nonce: AVqrHZ
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs on functions that take only keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 11696
.. date: 8401
.. nonce: dzz7nM
.. section: Library

Fix ID generation in msilib.

..

.. bpo: 9696
.. date: 8400
.. nonce: Nh0u8J
.. section: Library

Fix exception incorrectly raised by xdrlib.Packer.pack_int when trying to
pack a negative (in-range) integer.

..

.. bpo: 11675
.. date: 8399
.. nonce: qFfmkU
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.[Raw]Array objects created from an integer size are now
zeroed on creation.  This matches the behaviour specified by the
documentation.

..

.. bpo: 7639
.. date: 8398
.. nonce: PKfmwz
.. section: Library

Fix short file name generation in bdist_msi.

..

.. bpo: 11666
.. date: 8397
.. nonce: Hni56e
.. section: Library

let help() display named tuple attributes and methods that start with a
leading underscore.

..

.. bpo: 11673
.. date: 8396
.. nonce: uXlx4W
.. section: Library

Fix multiprocessing Array and RawArray constructors to accept a size of type
'long', rather than only accepting 'int'.

..

.. bpo: 10042
.. date: 8395
.. nonce: SCtRiD
.. section: Library

Fixed the total_ordering decorator to handle cross-type comparisons that
could lead to infinite recursion.

..

.. bpo: 10979
.. date: 8394
.. nonce: FjyVrT
.. section: Library

unittest stdout buffering now works with class and module setup and
teardown.

..

.. bpo: 11569
.. date: 8393
.. nonce: fp461F
.. section: Library

use absolute path to the sysctl command in multiprocessing to ensure that it
will be found regardless of the shell PATH. This ensures that
multiprocessing.cpu_count works on default installs of MacOSX.

..

.. bpo: 11500
.. date: 8392
.. nonce: SOGd4Y
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in the os x proxy bypass code for fully qualified IP addresses
in the proxy exception list.

..

.. bpo: 11131
.. date: 8391
.. nonce: PnmRwo
.. section: Library

Fix sign of zero in plus and minus operations when the context rounding mode
is ROUND_FLOOR.

..

.. bpo: 5622
.. date: 8390
.. nonce: dM7tnW
.. section: Library

Fix curses.wrapper to raise correct exception if curses initialization
fails.

..

.. bpo: 11391
.. date: 8389
.. nonce: hdoRPe
.. section: Library

Writing to a mmap object created with ``mmap.PROT_READ|mmap.PROT_EXEC``
would segfault instead of raising a TypeError.  Patch by Charles-François
Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11306
.. date: 8388
.. nonce: 2rXDt4
.. section: Library

mailbox in certain cases adapts to an inability to open certain files in
read-write mode.  Previously it detected this by checking for EACCES, now it
also checks for EROFS.

..

.. bpo: 11265
.. date: 8387
.. nonce: Y51oyn
.. section: Library

asyncore now correctly handles EPIPE, EBADF and EAGAIN errors on accept(),
send() and recv().

..

.. bpo: 11326
.. date: 8386
.. nonce: 2GUPyU
.. section: Library

Add the missing connect_ex() implementation for SSL sockets, and make it
work for non-blocking connects.

..

.. bpo: 10956
.. date: 8385
.. nonce: ArNOt6
.. section: Library

Buffered I/O classes retry reading or writing after a signal has arrived and
the handler returned successfully.

..

.. bpo: 10680
.. date: 8384
.. nonce: pAmFnC
.. section: Library

Fix mutually exclusive arguments for argument groups in argparse.

..

.. bpo: 4681
.. date: 8383
.. nonce: I20jgq
.. section: Library

Allow mmap() to work on file sizes and offsets larger than 4GB, even on
32-bit builds.  Initial patch by Ross Lagerwall, adapted for 32-bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 10360
.. date: 8382
.. nonce: JAYw4l
.. section: Library

In WeakSet, do not raise TypeErrors when testing for membership of
non-weakrefable objects.

..

.. bpo: 10549
.. date: 8381
.. nonce: 15cASW
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc traceback when text-documenting certain classes.

..

.. bpo: 940286
.. date: 8380
.. nonce: cPglIg
.. section: Library

pydoc.Helper.help() ignores input/output init parameters.

..

.. bpo: 11171
.. date: 8379
.. nonce: ZXEFXT
.. section: Library

Fix detection of config/Makefile when --prefix != --exec-prefix, which
caused Python to not start.

..

.. bpo: 11116
.. date: 8378
.. nonce: J0xgWH
.. section: Library

any error during addition of a message to a mailbox now causes a rollback,
instead of leaving the mailbox partially modified.

..

.. bpo: 8275
.. date: 8377
.. nonce: -TRADs
.. section: Library

Fix passing of callback arguments with ctypes under Win64. Patch by Stan
Mihai.

..

.. bpo: 10949
.. date: 8376
.. nonce: sknBTt
.. section: Library

Improved robustness of rotating file handlers.

..

.. bpo: 10955
.. date: 8375
.. nonce: RSqPRN
.. section: Library

Fix a potential crash when trying to mmap() a file past its length.  Initial
patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 10898
.. date: 8374
.. nonce: 2VhVxS
.. section: Library

Allow compiling the posix module when the C library defines a symbol named
FSTAT.

..

.. bpo: 10916
.. date: 8373
.. nonce: xpdEg8
.. section: Library

mmap should not segfault when a file is mapped using 0 as length and a
non-zero offset, and an attempt to read past the end of file is made (IndexError
is raised instead).  Patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 10875
.. date: 8372
.. nonce: RSNYLS
.. section: Library

Update Regular Expression HOWTO; patch by 'SilentGhost'.

..

.. bpo: 10827
.. date: 8371
.. nonce: vjZCZr
.. section: Library

Changed the rules for 2-digit years.  The time.asctime function will now
format any year when ``time.accept2dyear`` is false and will accept years >=
1000 otherwise.  The year range accepted by ``time.mktime`` and
``time.strftime`` is still system dependent, but ``time.mktime`` will now
accept full range supported by the OS.  Conversion of 2-digit years to
4-digit is deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 10869
.. date: 8370
.. nonce: 3xBkWx
.. section: Library

Fixed bug where ast.increment_lineno modified the root node twice.

..

.. bpo: 7858
.. date: 8369
.. nonce: DKZMOA
.. section: Library

Raise an error properly when os.utime() fails under Windows on an existing
file.

..

.. bpo: 3839
.. date: 8368
.. nonce: zMNSit
.. section: Library

wsgiref should not override a Content-Length header set by the application.
Initial patch by Clovis Fabricio.

..

.. bpo: 10806
.. date: 8367
.. nonce: dEztuB
.. section: Library

Fix subprocess pipes when some of the standard file descriptors (0, 1, 2)
are closed in the parent process.  Initial patch by Ross Lagerwall. (See
also: bpo-9905)

..

.. bpo: 4662
.. date: 8366
.. nonce: m3fHnI
.. section: Library

os.tempnam(), os.tmpfile() and os.tmpnam() now raise a py3k
DeprecationWarning.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8365
.. nonce: t8RJ2P
.. section: Library

Subclasses of collections.OrderedDict now work correctly with __missing__.

..

.. bpo: 10753
.. date: 8364
.. nonce: pjcQCT
.. section: Library

Characters ';', '=' and ',' in the PATH_INFO environment variable won't be
quoted when the URI is constructed by the wsgiref.util 's request_uri
method. According to RFC 3986, these characters can be a part of params in
PATH component of URI and need not be quoted.

..

.. bpo: 10738
.. date: 8363
.. nonce: GT7QZa
.. section: Library

Fix webbrowser.Opera.raise_opts

..

.. bpo: 9824
.. date: 8362
.. nonce: vJBIAh
.. section: Library

SimpleCookie now encodes , and ; in values to cater to how browsers actually
parse cookies.

..

.. bpo: 1379416
.. date: 8361
.. nonce: fpWgER
.. section: Library

eliminated a source of accidental unicode promotion in
email.header.Header.encode.

..

.. bpo: 5258
.. date: 8360
.. nonce: fNenmJ
.. section: Library

if site.py encounters a .pth file that generates an error, it now prints the
filename, line number, and traceback to stderr and skips the rest of that
individual file, instead of stopping processing entirely. (See also:
bpo-10642)

..

.. bpo: 10750
.. date: 8359
.. nonce: o-KFTn
.. section: Library

The ``raw`` attribute of buffered IO objects is now read-only.

..

.. bpo: 10242
.. date: 8358
.. nonce: uwgK8s
.. section: Library

unittest.TestCase.assertItemsEqual makes too many assumptions about input.

..

.. bpo: 10611
.. date: 8357
.. nonce: y67Wpv
.. section: Library

SystemExit should not cause a unittest test run to exit.

..

.. bpo: 6791
.. date: 8356
.. nonce: b5b4M7
.. section: Library

Limit header line length (to 65535 bytes) in http.client, to avoid denial of
services from the other party.

..

.. bpo: 9907
.. date: 8355
.. nonce: EC_Wry
.. section: Library

Fix tab handling on OSX when using editline by calling rl_initialize first,
then setting our custom defaults, then reading .editrc.

..

.. bpo: 4188
.. date: 8354
.. nonce: nIr5eF
.. section: Library

Avoid creating dummy thread objects when logging operations from the
threading module (with the internal verbose flag activated).

..

.. bpo: 9721
.. date: 8353
.. nonce: G8i-SO
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of urljoin when the relative url starts with a ';'
character. Patch by Wes Chow.

..

.. bpo: 10714
.. date: 8352
.. nonce: 2ytXWI
.. section: Library

Limit length of incoming request in http.server to 65536 bytes for security
reasons.  Initial patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 9558
.. date: 8351
.. nonce: Zu3z6Q
.. section: Library

Fix distutils.command.build_ext with VS 8.0.

..

.. bpo: 10695
.. date: 8350
.. nonce: 9PoZLI
.. section: Library

passing the port as a string value to telnetlib no longer causes debug mode
to fail.

..

.. bpo: 10478
.. date: 8349
.. nonce: 3rusTg
.. section: Library

Reentrant calls inside buffered IO objects (for example by way of a signal
handler) now raise a RuntimeError instead of freezing the current process.

..

.. bpo: 10497
.. date: 8348
.. nonce: KCVp0v
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect use of gettext in argparse.

..

.. bpo: 10464
.. date: 8347
.. nonce: oT76Cm
.. section: Library

netrc now correctly handles lines with embedded '#' characters.

..

.. bpo: 1731717
.. date: 8346
.. nonce: 1WiN2u
.. section: Library

Fixed the problem where subprocess.wait() could cause an OSError exception
when The OS had been told to ignore SIGCLD in our process or otherwise not
wait for exiting child processes.

..

.. bpo: 9509
.. date: 8345
.. nonce: Oh-iMy
.. section: Library

argparse now properly handles IOErrors raised by argparse.FileType.

..

.. bpo: 9348
.. date: 8344
.. nonce: zsJPPj
.. section: Library

Raise an early error if argparse nargs and metavar don't match.

..

.. bpo: 8982
.. date: 8343
.. nonce: fTONNH
.. section: Library

Improve the documentation for the argparse Namespace object.

..

.. bpo: 9343
.. date: 8342
.. nonce: 9T-Qyz
.. section: Library

Document that argparse parent parsers must be configured before their
children.

..

.. bpo: 9026
.. date: 8341
.. nonce: 2xqEFT
.. section: Library

Fix order of argparse sub-commands in help messages.

..

.. bpo: 9347
.. date: 8340
.. nonce: R8xBsQ
.. section: Library

Fix formatting for tuples in argparse type= error messages.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8339
.. nonce: qXxXWp
.. section: Library

Stop using the old interface for providing methods and attributes in the
_sre module. Among other things, this gives these classes ``__class__``
attributes. (See #12099)

..

.. bpo: 10169
.. date: 8338
.. nonce: OXJ9Nh
.. section: Library

Fix argument parsing in socket.sendto() to avoid error masking.

..

.. bpo: 12051
.. date: 8337
.. nonce: 7HjY_U
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in json.dumps() while encoding highly-nested objects using the
C accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 12017
.. date: 8336
.. nonce: w25YNq
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in json.loads() while decoding highly-nested objects using the
C accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 1838
.. date: 8335
.. nonce: EzKU3z
.. section: Library

Prevent segfault in ctypes, when _as_parameter_ on a class is set to an
instance of the class.

..

.. bpo: 678250
.. date: 8334
.. nonce: a5vtlO
.. section: Library

Make mmap flush a noop on ACCESS_READ and ACCESS_COPY.

..

.. bpo: 11718
.. date: 8333
.. nonce: giS1iY
.. section: IDLE

IDLE's open module dialog couldn't find the __init__.py file in a package.

..

.. bpo: 12590
.. date: 8332
.. nonce: dcDjo7
.. section: IDLE

IDLE editor window now always displays the first line when opening a long
file.  With Tk 8.5, the first line was hidden.

..

.. bpo: 11088
.. date: 8331
.. nonce: 08NI5v
.. section: IDLE

don't crash when using F5 to run a script in IDLE on MacOSX with Tk 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 10940
.. date: 8330
.. nonce: qwi3cm
.. section: IDLE

Workaround an IDLE hang on Mac OS X 10.6 when using the menu accelerators
for Open Module, Go to Line, and New Indent Width. The accelerators still
work but no longer appear in the menu items.

..

.. bpo: 10907
.. date: 8329
.. nonce: BHHc_r
.. section: IDLE

Warn OS X 10.6 IDLE users to use ActiveState Tcl/Tk 8.5, rather than the
currently problematic Apple-supplied one, when running with the 64-/32-bit
installer variant.

..

.. bpo: 11052
.. date: 8328
.. nonce: avmtSQ
.. section: IDLE

Correct IDLE menu accelerators on Mac OS X for Save commands.

..

.. bpo: 6075
.. date: 8327
.. nonce: AHKNEZ
.. section: IDLE

IDLE on Mac OS X now works with both Carbon AquaTk and Cocoa AquaTk.

..

.. bpo: 10404
.. date: 8326
.. nonce: CBzs_G
.. section: IDLE

Use ctl-button-1 on OSX for the context menu in Idle.

..

.. bpo: 10107
.. date: 8325
.. nonce: Bsx-F4
.. section: IDLE

Warn about unsaved files in IDLE on OSX.

..

.. bpo: 10406
.. date: 8324
.. nonce: HKSefS
.. section: IDLE

Enable Rstrip IDLE extension on OSX (just like on other platforms).

..

.. bpo: 6378
.. date: 8323
.. nonce: Vr_x3W
.. section: IDLE

Further adjust idle.bat to start associated Python

..

.. bpo: 11896
.. date: 8322
.. nonce: XPwdkw
.. section: IDLE

Save on Close failed despite selecting "Yes" in dialog.

..

.. bpo: 4676
.. date: 8321
.. nonce: qQkued
.. section: IDLE

<Home> toggle failing on Tk 8.5, causing IDLE exits and strange selection
behavior.  Improve selection extension behaviour.

..

.. bpo: 3851
.. date: 8320
.. nonce: iy6ENX
.. section: IDLE

<Home> toggle non-functional when NumLock set on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 11217
.. date: 8319
.. nonce: mIEwfc
.. section: Build

For 64-bit/32-bit Mac OS X universal framework builds, ensure "make install"
creates symlinks in --prefix bin for the "-32" files in the framework bin
directory like the installer does.

..

.. bpo: 11411
.. date: 8318
.. nonce: 1m9fjv
.. section: Build

Fix 'make DESTDIR=' with a relative destination.

..

.. bpo: 10709
.. date: 8317
.. nonce: QpLCFk
.. section: Build

Add updated AIX notes in Misc/README.AIX.

..

.. bpo: 11184
.. date: 8316
.. nonce: sGfAXw
.. section: Build

Fix large-file support on AIX.

..

.. bpo: 941346
.. date: 8315
.. nonce: heMADD
.. section: Build

Fix broken shared library build on AIX.

..

.. bpo: 11268
.. date: 8314
.. nonce: Lgcka6
.. section: Build

Prevent Mac OS X Installer failure if Documentation package had previously
been installed.

..

.. bpo: 11079
.. date: 8313
.. nonce: Y0Hh5V
.. section: Build

The /Applications/Python x.x folder created by the Mac OS X installers now
includes a link to the installed documentation.

..

.. bpo: 11054
.. date: 8312
.. nonce: BN3sYU
.. section: Build

Allow Mac OS X installer builds to again work on 10.5 with the
system-provided Python.

..

.. bpo: 10843
.. date: 8311
.. nonce: EdyFR6
.. section: Build

Update third-party library versions used in OS X 32-bit installer builds:
bzip2 1.0.6, readline 6.1.2, SQLite 3.7.4 (with FTS3/FTS4 and RTREE
enabled), and ncursesw 5.5 (wide-char support enabled).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8310
.. nonce: nsY3xU
.. section: Build

Don't run pgen twice when using make -j.

..

.. bpo: 7716
.. date: 8309
.. nonce: KkZ-2b
.. section: Build

Under Solaris, don't assume existence of /usr/xpg4/bin/grep in the configure
script but use $GREP instead.  Patch by Fabian Groffen.

..

.. bpo: 10475
.. date: 8308
.. nonce: LVKSbB
.. section: Build

Don't hardcode compilers for LDSHARED/LDCXXSHARED on NetBSD and DragonFly
BSD.  Patch by Nicolas Joly.

..

.. bpo: 10655
.. date: 8307
.. nonce: WauLJp
.. section: Build

Fix the build on PowerPC on Linux with GCC when building with timestamp
profiling (--with-tsc): the preprocessor test for the PowerPC support now
looks for "__powerpc__" as well as "__ppc__": the latter seems to only be
present on OS X; the former is the correct one for Linux with GCC.

..

.. bpo: 1099
.. date: 8306
.. nonce: KikOsu
.. section: Build

Fix the build on MacOSX when building a framework with pydebug using GCC
4.0.

..

.. bpo: 11164
.. date: 8305
.. nonce: w2nrYU
.. section: Tests

Remove obsolete allnodes test from minidom test.

..

.. bpo: 12205
.. date: 8304
.. nonce: gVhWmC
.. section: Tests

Fix test_subprocess failure due to uninstalled test data.

..

.. bpo: 5723
.. date: 8303
.. nonce: Lfg1OX
.. section: Tests

Improve json tests to be executed with and without accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 11910
.. date: 8302
.. nonce: HhQx49
.. section: Tests

Fix test_heapq to skip the C tests when _heapq is missing.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8301
.. nonce: i8QOXe
.. section: Tests

Fix test_startfile to wait for child process to terminate before finishing.

..

.. bpo: 11719
.. date: 8300
.. nonce: ojamUL
.. section: Tests

Fix message about unexpected test_msilib skip on non-Windows platforms.
Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 7108
.. date: 8299
.. nonce: xaF3OE
.. section: Tests

Fix test_commands to not fail when special attributes ('@' or '.') appear in
'ls -l' output.

..

.. bpo: 11490
.. date: 8298
.. nonce: I86Gxz
.. section: Tests

test_subprocess:test_leaking_fds_on_error no longer gives a false positive
if the last directory in the path is inaccessible.

..

.. bpo: 10822
.. date: 8297
.. nonce: P0VrIZ
.. section: Tests

Fix test_posix:test_getgroups failure under Solaris.  Patch by Ross
Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 6293
.. date: 8296
.. nonce: J7ur1U
.. section: Tests

Have regrtest.py echo back sys.flags.  This is done by default in whole runs
and enabled selectively using ``--header`` when running an explicit list of
tests.  Original patch by Collin Winter.

..

.. bpo: 775964
.. date: 8295
.. nonce: 7a2XLN
.. section: Tests

test_grp now skips YP/NIS entries instead of failing when encountering them.

..

.. bpo: 7110
.. date: 8294
.. nonce: SyQreJ
.. section: Tests

regrtest now sends test failure reports and single-failure tracebacks to
stderr rather than stdout.
