.. bpo: 20041
.. date: 9818
.. nonce: TypyGp
.. release date: 2016-06-12
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed TypeError when frame.f_trace is set to None. Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 25702
.. date: 9817
.. nonce: ipxyJs
.. section: Core and Builtins

A --with-lto configure option has been added that will enable link time
optimizations at build time during a make profile-opt. Some compilers and
toolchains are known to not produce stable code when using LTO, be sure to
test things thoroughly before relying on it. It can provide a few % speed up
over profile-opt alone.

..

.. bpo: 26168
.. date: 9816
.. nonce: -nPBL6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible refleaks in failing Py_BuildValue() with the "N" format unit.

..

.. bpo: 27039
.. date: 9815
.. nonce: Zj7tV7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bytearray.remove() for values greater than 127.  Patch by Joe Jevnik.

..

.. bpo: 4806
.. date: 9814
.. nonce: BOapuA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid masking the original TypeError exception when using star (*) unpacking
and the exception was raised from a generator.  Based on patch by Hagen
Fürstenau.

..

.. bpo: 26659
.. date: 9813
.. nonce: 5PRa83
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the builtin slice type support cycle collection.

..

.. bpo: 26718
.. date: 9812
.. nonce: K5PQ8j
.. section: Core and Builtins

super.__init__ no longer leaks memory if called multiple times. NOTE: A
direct call of super.__init__ is not endorsed!

..

.. bpo: 13410
.. date: 9811
.. nonce: wyldQ4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug in PyUnicode_Format where it failed to properly ignore errors
from a __int__() method.

..

.. bpo: 26494
.. date: 9810
.. nonce: Ar7ILt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on iterating exhausting iterators. Affected classes are generic
sequence iterators, iterators of bytearray, list, tuple, set, frozenset,
dict, OrderedDict and corresponding views.

..

.. bpo: 26581
.. date: 9809
.. nonce: yNA7nm
.. section: Core and Builtins

If coding cookie is specified multiple times on a line in Python source code
file, only the first one is taken to account.

..

.. bpo: 22836
.. date: 9808
.. nonce: cimt1y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure exception reports from PyErr_Display() and PyErr_WriteUnraisable()
are sensible even when formatting them produces secondary errors.  This
affects the reports produced by sys.__excepthook__() and when __del__()
raises an exception.

..

.. bpo: 22847
.. date: 9807
.. nonce: 6baj9f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve method cache efficiency.

..

.. bpo: 25843
.. date: 9806
.. nonce: t2kGug
.. section: Core and Builtins

When compiling code, don't merge constants if they are equal but have a
different types. For example, ``f1, f2 = lambda: 1, lambda: 1.0`` is now
correctly compiled to two different functions: ``f1()`` returns ``1``
(``int``) and ``f2()`` returns ``1.0`` (``int``), even if ``1`` and ``1.0``
are equal.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9805
.. nonce: Rhr9Dh
.. section: Core and Builtins

[UPDATE] Remove the one of the pickleability tests in _PyObject_GetState()
due to regressions observed in Cython-based projects.

..

.. bpo: 25961
.. date: 9804
.. nonce: Hdjjw0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallowed null characters in the type name.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9803
.. nonce: Wq0E86
.. section: Core and Builtins

Instances of extension types with a state that aren't subclasses of list or
dict and haven't implemented any pickle-related methods (__reduce__,
__reduce_ex__, __getnewargs__, __getnewargs_ex__, or __getstate__), can no
longer be pickled.  Including memoryview.

..

.. bpo: 20440
.. date: 9802
.. nonce: GCwOfH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Massive replacing unsafe attribute setting code with special macro
Py_SETREF.

..

.. bpo: 25421
.. date: 9801
.. nonce: c47YEL
.. section: Core and Builtins

__sizeof__ methods of builtin types now use dynamic basic size. This allows
sys.getsize() to work correctly with their subclasses with __slots__
defined.

..

.. bpo: 19543
.. date: 9800
.. nonce: FLtPTG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added Py3k warning for decoding unicode.

..

.. bpo: 24097
.. date: 9799
.. nonce: Vt4E-i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash in object.__reduce__() if slot name is freed inside __getattr__.

..

.. bpo: 24731
.. date: 9798
.. nonce: F4USDN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on converting objects with special methods __str__, __trunc__,
and __float__ returning instances of subclasses of str, long, and float to
subclasses of str, long, and float correspondingly.

..

.. bpo: 26478
.. date: 9797
.. nonce: n0dB8e
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix semantic bugs when using binary operators with dictionary views and
tuples.

..

.. bpo: 26171
.. date: 9796
.. nonce: 8SaQEa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible integer overflow and heap corruption in zipimporter.get_data().

..

.. bpo: 26556
.. date: 9795
.. nonce: v5j2uL
.. section: Library

Update expat to 2.1.1, fixes CVE-2015-1283.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9794
.. nonce: qP8WT-
.. section: Library

Fix TLS stripping vulnerability in smptlib, CVE-2016-0772.  Reported by Team
Oststrom

..

.. bpo: 7356
.. date: 9793
.. nonce: cS5wgj
.. section: Library

ctypes.util: Make parsing of ldconfig output independent of the locale.

..

.. bpo: 25738
.. date: 9792
.. nonce: I_1jpQ
.. section: Library

Stop BaseHTTPServer.BaseHTTPRequestHandler.send_error() from sending a
message body for 205 Reset Content.  Also, don't send the Content-Type
header field in responses that don't have a body.  Based on patch by Susumu
Koshiba.

..

.. bpo: 21313
.. date: 9791
.. nonce: W30MBr
.. section: Library

Fix the "platform" module to tolerate when sys.version contains truncated
build information.

..

.. bpo: 27211
.. date: 9790
.. nonce: _7HYjx
.. section: Library

Fix possible memory corruption in io.IOBase.readline().

..

.. bpo: 27114
.. date: 9789
.. nonce: bGCuAM
.. section: Library

Fix SSLContext._load_windows_store_certs fails with PermissionError

..

.. bpo: 14132
.. date: 9788
.. nonce: Gpiuxk
.. section: Library

Fix urllib.request redirect handling when the target only has a query
string.  Fix by Ján Janech.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9787
.. nonce: bMrCz8
.. section: Library

Removed the requirements for the ctypes and modulefinder modules to be
compatible with earlier Python versions.

..

.. bpo: 22274
.. date: 9786
.. nonce: 0RHDMN
.. section: Library

In the subprocess module, allow stderr to be redirected to stdout even when
stdout is not redirected.  Patch by Akira Li.

..

.. bpo: 12045
.. date: 9785
.. nonce: LEH09W
.. section: Library

Avoid duplicate execution of command in ctypes.util._get_soname(). Patch by
Sijin Joseph.

..

.. bpo: 26960
.. date: 9784
.. nonce: 2l_IOl
.. section: Library

Backported #16270 from Python 3 to Python 2, to prevent urllib from hanging
when retrieving certain FTP files.

..

.. bpo: 25745
.. date: 9783
.. nonce: -n8acU
.. section: Library

Fixed leaking a userptr in curses panel destructor.

..

.. bpo: 17765
.. date: 9782
.. nonce: hiSVS1
.. section: Library

weakref.ref() no longer silently ignores keyword arguments. Patch by Georg
Brandl.

..

.. bpo: 26873
.. date: 9781
.. nonce: _qIPUp
.. section: Library

xmlrpclib now raises ResponseError on unsupported type tags instead of
silently return incorrect result.

..

.. bpo: 24114
.. date: 9780
.. nonce: RMRMtM
.. section: Library

Fix an uninitialized variable in `ctypes.util`.

The bug only occurs on SunOS when the ctypes implementation searches for the
`crle` program.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.  Tested on SunOS by Kees Bos.

..

.. bpo: 26864
.. date: 9779
.. nonce: DFsgvI
.. section: Library

In urllib, change the proxy bypass host checking against no_proxy to be
case-insensitive, and to not match unrelated host names that happen to have
a bypassed hostname as a suffix.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26804
.. date: 9778
.. nonce: 6b9_UW
.. section: Library

urllib will prefer lower_case proxy environment variables over UPPER_CASE or
Mixed_Case ones. Patch contributed by Hans-Peter Jansen.

..

.. bpo: 26837
.. date: 9777
.. nonce: IKt9NJ
.. section: Library

assertSequenceEqual() now correctly outputs non-stringified differing items.
This affects assertListEqual() and assertTupleEqual().

..

.. bpo: 26822
.. date: 9776
.. nonce: rYSL4W
.. section: Library

itemgetter, attrgetter and methodcaller objects no longer silently ignore
keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 26657
.. date: 9775
.. nonce: dfteub
.. section: Library

Fix directory traversal vulnerability with SimpleHTTPServer on Windows.
This fixes a regression that was introduced in 2.7.7.  Based on patch by
Philipp Hagemeister.

..

.. bpo: 19377
.. date: 9774
.. nonce: Al9S53
.. section: Library

Add .svg to mimetypes.types_map.

..

.. bpo: 13952
.. date: 9773
.. nonce: SOoTVE
.. section: Library

Add .csv to mimetypes.types_map.  Patch by Geoff Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 16329
.. date: 9772
.. nonce: nuXD8W
.. section: Library

Add .webm to mimetypes.types_map.  Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 23735
.. date: 9771
.. nonce: Y5oQ9r
.. section: Library

Handle terminal resizing with Readline 6.3+ by installing our own SIGWINCH
handler.  Patch by Eric Price.

..

.. bpo: 26644
.. date: 9770
.. nonce: 7tt1tk
.. section: Library

Raise ValueError rather than SystemError when a negative length is passed to
SSLSocket.recv() or read().

..

.. bpo: 23804
.. date: 9769
.. nonce: PP63Ff
.. section: Library

Fix SSL recv(0) and read(0) methods to return zero bytes instead of up to
1024.

..

.. bpo: 24266
.. date: 9768
.. nonce: YZgVyM
.. section: Library

Ctrl+C during Readline history search now cancels the search mode when
compiled with Readline 7.

..

.. bpo: 23857
.. date: 9767
.. nonce: u94yEL
.. section: Library

Implement PEP 493, adding a Python-2-only ssl module API and environment
variable to configure the default handling of SSL/TLS certificates for HTTPS
connections.

..

.. bpo: 26313
.. date: 9766
.. nonce: xhX2Gu
.. section: Library

ssl.py _load_windows_store_certs fails if windows cert store is empty. Patch
by Baji.

..

.. bpo: 26513
.. date: 9765
.. nonce: HoPepy
.. section: Library

Fixes platform module detection of Windows Server

..

.. bpo: 23718
.. date: 9764
.. nonce: AMPC0o
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing time in week 0 before Jan 1.  Original patch by Tamás Bence
Gedai.

..

.. bpo: 26177
.. date: 9763
.. nonce: HlSWer
.. section: Library

Fixed the keys() method for Canvas and Scrollbar widgets.

..

.. bpo: 15068
.. date: 9762
.. nonce: bcHtiw
.. section: Library

Got rid of excessive buffering in the fileinput module. The bufsize
parameter is no longer used.

..

.. bpo: 2202
.. date: 9761
.. nonce: EPsrOA
.. section: Library

Fix UnboundLocalError in AbstractDigestAuthHandler.get_algorithm_impls.
Initial patch by Mathieu Dupuy.

..

.. bpo: 26475
.. date: 9760
.. nonce: JXVccY
.. section: Library

Fixed debugging output for regular expressions with the (?x) flag.

..

.. bpo: 26385
.. date: 9759
.. nonce: mfwNyt
.. section: Library

Remove the file if the internal fdopen() call in NamedTemporaryFile() fails.
Based on patch by Silent Ghost.

..

.. bpo: 26309
.. date: 9758
.. nonce: TSTJ3A
.. section: Library

In the "SocketServer" module, shut down the request (closing the connected
socket) when verify_request() returns false.  Based on patch by Aviv
Palivoda.

..

.. bpo: 25939
.. date: 9757
.. nonce: I-qK2E
.. section: Library

On Windows open the cert store readonly in ssl.enum_certificates.

..

.. bpo: 24303
.. date: 9756
.. nonce: FDBJWM
.. section: Library

Fix random EEXIST upon multiprocessing semaphores creation with Linux PID
namespaces enabled.

..

.. bpo: 25698
.. date: 9755
.. nonce: Id3NAo
.. section: Library

Importing module if the stack is too deep no longer replaces imported module
with the empty one.

..

.. bpo: 12923
.. date: 9754
.. nonce: HPAu-B
.. section: Library

Reset FancyURLopener's redirect counter even if there is an exception.
Based on patches by Brian Brazil and Daniel Rocco.

..

.. bpo: 25945
.. date: 9753
.. nonce: guNgNM
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash when unpickle the functools.partial object with wrong state.
Fixed a leak in failed functools.partial constructor. "args" and "keywords"
attributes of functools.partial have now always types tuple and dict
correspondingly.

..

.. bpo: 19883
.. date: 9752
.. nonce: z9TsO6
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflows in zipimport.

..

.. bpo: 26147
.. date: 9751
.. nonce: UA8O6s
.. section: Library

xmlrpclib now works with unicode not encodable with used non-UTF-8 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 16620
.. date: 9750
.. nonce: rxpn_Y
.. section: Library

Fixed AttributeError in msilib.Directory.glob().

..

.. bpo: 21847
.. date: 9749
.. nonce: smLnll
.. section: Library

Fixed xmlrpclib on Unicode-disabled builds.

..

.. bpo: 6500
.. date: 9748
.. nonce: n8NGo4
.. section: Library

Fixed infinite recursion in urllib2.Request.__getattr__().

..

.. bpo: 26083
.. date: 9747
.. nonce: siyOnS
.. section: Library

Workaround a subprocess bug that raises an incorrect "ValueError: insecure
string pickle" exception instead of the actual exception on some platforms
such as Mac OS X when an exception raised in the forked child process prior
to the exec() was large enough that it overflowed the internal errpipe_read
pipe buffer.

..

.. bpo: 24103
.. date: 9746
.. nonce: gWAG0r
.. section: Library

Fixed possible use after free in ElementTree.iterparse().

..

.. bpo: 20954
.. date: 9745
.. nonce: H9-NYO
.. section: Library

_args_from_interpreter_flags used by multiprocessing and some tests no
longer behaves incorrectly in the presence of the PYTHONHASHSEED environment
variable.

..

.. bpo: 14285
.. date: 9744
.. nonce: Z5YcQy
.. section: Library

When executing a package with the "python -m package" option, and package
initialization raises ImportError, a proper traceback is now reported.

..

.. bpo: 6478
.. date: 9743
.. nonce: -Bi9Hb
.. section: Library

_strptime's regexp cache now is reset after changing timezone with
time.tzset().

..

.. bpo: 25718
.. date: 9742
.. nonce: D9mHZF
.. section: Library

Fixed copying object with state with boolean value is false.

..

.. bpo: 25742
.. date: 9741
.. nonce: y6AAQ4
.. section: Library

:func:`locale.setlocale` now accepts a Unicode string for its second
parameter.

..

.. bpo: 10131
.. date: 9740
.. nonce: a7tptz
.. section: Library

Fixed deep copying of minidom documents.  Based on patch by Marian Ganisin.

..

.. bpo: 25725
.. date: 9739
.. nonce: mGRrqb
.. section: Library

Fixed a reference leak in cPickle.loads() when unpickling invalid data
including tuple instructions.

..

.. bpo: 25663
.. date: 9738
.. nonce: Ofwfqa
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, avoid listing duplicate global names, and search
the global namespace before searching builtins.

..

.. bpo: 25688
.. date: 9737
.. nonce: 8P1HOv
.. section: Library

Fixed file leak in ElementTree.iterparse() raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 23914
.. date: 9736
.. nonce: vQS48b
.. section: Library

Fixed SystemError raised by CPickle unpickler on broken data.

..

.. bpo: 25924
.. date: 9735
.. nonce: Uxr2vt
.. section: Library

Avoid unnecessary serialization of getaddrinfo(3) calls on OS X versions
10.5 or higher.  Original patch by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 26406
.. date: 9734
.. nonce: ihvhF4
.. section: Library

Avoid unnecessary serialization of getaddrinfo(3) calls on current versions
of OpenBSD and NetBSD.  Patch by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 5124
.. date: 9733
.. nonce: 4kwBvM
.. section: IDLE

Paste with text selected now replaces the selection on X11. This matches how
paste works on Windows, Mac, most modern Linux apps, and ttk widgets.
Original patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 24759
.. date: 9732
.. nonce: ccmySu
.. section: IDLE

Make clear in idlelib.idle_test.__init__ that the directory is a private
implementation of test.test_idle and tool for maintainers.

..

.. bpo: 26673
.. date: 9731
.. nonce: dh0_Ij
.. section: IDLE

When tk reports font size as 0, change to size 10. Such fonts on Linux
prevented the configuration dialog from opening.

..

.. bpo: 27044
.. date: 9730
.. nonce: 4y7tyM
.. section: IDLE

Add ConfigDialog.remove_var_callbacks to stop memory leaks.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9729
.. nonce: _YJfG7
.. section: IDLE

In the 'IDLE-console differences' section of the IDLE doc, clarify how
running with IDLE affects sys.modules and the standard streams.

..

.. bpo: 25507
.. date: 9728
.. nonce: bx-miX
.. section: IDLE

fix incorrect change in IOBinding that prevented printing. Change also
prevented saving shell window with non-ascii characters. Augment IOBinding
htest to include all major IOBinding functions.

..

.. bpo: 25905
.. date: 9727
.. nonce: FzNb3B
.. section: IDLE

Revert unwanted conversion of ' to ’ RIGHT SINGLE QUOTATION MARK in
README.txt and open this and NEWS.txt with 'ascii'. Re-encode CREDITS.txt to
utf-8 and open it with 'utf-8'.

..

.. bpo: 26417
.. date: 9726
.. nonce: XmSxEK
.. section: IDLE

Prevent spurious errors and incorrect defaults when installing IDLE 2.7 on
OS X: default configuration settings are no longer installed from OS X
specific copies.

..

.. bpo: 26736
.. date: 9725
.. nonce: U_Hyqo
.. section: Documentation

Used HTTPS for external links in the documentation if possible.

..

.. bpo: 6953
.. date: 9724
.. nonce: Zk6rno
.. section: Documentation

Rework the Readline module documentation to group related functions
together, and add more details such as what underlying Readline functions
and variables are accessed.

..

.. bpo: 26014
.. date: 9723
.. nonce: C3Hbb7
.. section: Documentation

Guide users to the newer packaging documentation as was done for Python 3.x.
In particular, the top-level 2.7 documentation page now links to the newer
installer and distributions pages rather than the legacy install and
Distutils pages; these are still linked to in the library/distutils doc
page.

..

.. bpo: 21916
.. date: 9722
.. nonce: muwCyp
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the turtle module.  Patch by ingrid, Gregory Loyse and Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. bpo: 25940
.. date: 9721
.. nonce: PgiLVN
.. section: Tests

Changed test_ssl to use self-signed.pythontest.net.  This avoids relying on
svn.python.org, which recently changed root certificate.

..

.. bpo: 25616
.. date: 9720
.. nonce: Qr-60p
.. section: Tests

Tests for OrderedDict are extracted from test_collections into separate file
test_ordered_dict.

..

.. bpo: 22359
.. date: 9719
.. nonce: laY9yB
.. section: Build

Avoid incorrect recursive $(MAKE), and disable the rules for running pgen
when cross-compiling.  The pgen output is normally saved with the source
code anyway, and is still regenerated when doing a native build. Patch by
Jonas Wagner and Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 19450
.. date: 9718
.. nonce: iS8xhV
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use SQLite 3.8.11.0.

..

.. bpo: 27229
.. date: 9717
.. nonce: C2NDch
.. section: Build

Fix the cross-compiling pgen rule for in-tree builds.  Patch by Xavier de
Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 17603
.. date: 9716
.. nonce: 102DA-
.. section: Build

Avoid error about nonexistant fileblocks.o file by using a lower-level check
for st_blocks in struct stat.

..

.. bpo: 26465
.. date: 9715
.. nonce: _YR608
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use OpenSSL 1.0.2g.

..

.. bpo: 24421
.. date: 9714
.. nonce: 2zY7vM
.. section: Build

Compile Modules/_math.c once, before building extensions. Previously it
could fail to compile properly if the math and cmath builds were concurrent.

..

.. bpo: 25824
.. date: 9713
.. nonce: u0HToh
.. section: Build

Fixes sys.winver to not include any architecture suffix.

..

.. bpo: 25348
.. date: 9712
.. nonce: u6_BaQ
.. section: Build

Added ``--pgo`` and ``--pgo-job`` arguments to ``PCbuild\build.bat`` for
building with Profile-Guided Optimization.  The old
``PCbuild\build_pgo.bat`` script is now deprecated, and simply calls
``PCbuild\build.bat --pgo %*``.

..

.. bpo: 25827
.. date: 9711
.. nonce: yg3DMM
.. section: Build

Add support for building with ICC to ``configure``, including a new
``--with-icc`` flag.

..

.. bpo: 25696
.. date: 9710
.. nonce: 2R_wIv
.. section: Build

Fix installation of Python on UNIX with make -j9.

..

.. bpo: 26930
.. date: 9709
.. nonce: Sqz2O3
.. section: Build

Update OS X 10.5+ 32-bit-only installer to build and link with OpenSSL
1.0.2h.

..

.. bpo: 26268
.. date: 9708
.. nonce: I3-YLh
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use OpenSSL 1.0.2f.

..

.. bpo: 25136
.. date: 9707
.. nonce: Vi-fmO
.. section: Build

Support Apple Xcode 7's new textual SDK stub libraries.

..

.. bpo: 26799
.. date: 9706
.. nonce: gK2VXX
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix python-gdb.py: don't get C types once when the Python code is loaded,
but get C types on demand. The C types can change if python-gdb.py is loaded
before the Python executable. Patch written by Thomas Ilsche.

..

.. bpo: 30255
.. date: 9705
.. nonce: EGf-zW
.. section: C API

PySlice_GetIndicesEx now clips the step to [-PY_SSIZE_T_MAX, PY_SSIZE_T_MAX]
instead of [-PY_SSIZE_T_MAX-1, PY_SSIZE_T_MAX].  This makes it safe to do
"step = -step" when reversing a slice.

..

.. bpo: 26476
.. date: 9704
.. nonce: oJrb6q
.. section: C API

Fixed compilation error when use PyErr_BadInternalCall() in C++. Patch by
Jeroen Demeyer.

..

.. bpo: 17500
.. date: 9703
.. nonce: QTZbRV
.. section: Windows

Remove unused and outdated icons. (See also:
https://github.com/python/pythondotorg/issues/945)
