.. bpo: 2236
.. date: 8293
.. nonce: 1Mj4VJ
.. release date: 2010-11-27
.. section: Library

distutils' mkpath ignored the mode parameter.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8292
.. nonce: NFeWRc
.. section: Library

Fix typo in one sdist option (medata-check).

..

.. bpo: 10323
.. date: 8291
.. nonce: rFKI3X
.. section: Library

itertools.islice() now consumes the minimum number of inputs before
stopping.  Formerly, the final state of the underlying iterator was
undefined.

..

.. bpo: 10565
.. date: 8290
.. nonce: g3L9da
.. section: Library

The collections.Iterator ABC now checks for both ``__iter__`` and ``next``.

..

.. bpo: 10092
.. date: 8289
.. nonce: -B7ynY
.. section: Library

Properly reset locale in calendar.Locale*Calendar classes.

..

.. bpo: 10459
.. date: 8288
.. nonce: G0RFoD
.. section: Library

Update CJK character names to Unicode 5.2.

..

.. bpo: 6098
.. date: 8287
.. nonce: CKisab
.. section: Library

Don't claim DOM level 3 conformance in minidom.

..

.. bpo: 10561
.. date: 8286
.. nonce: gxs6bQ
.. section: Library

In pdb, clear the breakpoints by the breakpoint number.

..

.. bpo: 5762
.. date: 8285
.. nonce: ADvGzb
.. section: Library

Fix AttributeError raised by ``xml.dom.minidom`` when an empty XML namespace
attribute is encountered.

..

.. bpo: 1710703
.. date: 8284
.. nonce: NAAh-d
.. section: Library

Write structures for an empty ZIP archive when a ZipFile is created in modes
'a' or 'w' and then closed without adding any files. Raise BadZipfile
(rather than IOError) when opening small non-ZIP files.

..

.. bpo: 4493
.. date: 8283
.. nonce: idMjMG
.. section: Library

urllib2 adds '/' in front of path components which does not start with '/.
Common behavior exhibited by browsers and other clients.

..

.. bpo: 10407
.. date: 8282
.. nonce: f8LrF_
.. section: Library

Fix one NameError in distutils.

..

.. bpo: 10198
.. date: 8281
.. nonce: 7ruhdY
.. section: Library

fix duplicate header written to wave files when writeframes() is called
without data.

..

.. bpo: 10467
.. date: 8280
.. nonce: uNWGiY
.. section: Library

Fix BytesIO.readinto() after seeking into a position after the end of the
file.

..

.. bpo: 5111
.. date: 8279
.. nonce: XegYFR
.. section: Library

IPv6 Host in the Header is wrapped inside [ ]. Patch by Chandru.

..

.. bpo: 6378
.. date: 8278
.. nonce: ovcYOt
.. section: IDLE

idle.bat now runs with the appropriate Python version rather than the system
default. Patch by Sridhar Ratnakumar.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8277
.. nonce: 64ssfS
.. section: Build

Backport r83399 to allow test_distutils to pass on installed versions.

..

.. bpo: 1303434
.. date: 8276
.. nonce: AVO6EG
.. section: Build

Generate ZIP file containing all PDBs.

..

.. bpo: 9424
.. date: 8275
.. nonce: BO5Jfa
.. section: Tests

Replace deprecated assert* methods in the Python test suite.

..

.. bpo: 10299
.. date: 8274
.. nonce: ERtbPa
.. section: Documentation

List the built-in functions in a table in functions.rst.
