.. bpo: 21350
.. date: 9326
.. nonce: jnq6gO
.. release date: 2014-05-17
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix file.writelines() to accept arbitrary buffer objects, as advertised.
Patch by Brian Kearns.

..

.. bpo: 20437
.. date: 9325
.. nonce: 9Rsiua
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed 43 potential bugs when deleting object references.

..

.. bpo: 21134
.. date: 9324
.. nonce: ZL4SKo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when str is called on an uninitialized UnicodeEncodeError,
UnicodeDecodeError, or UnicodeTranslateError object.

..

.. bpo: 20494
.. date: 9323
.. nonce: uGIFPX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that free()d memory arenas are really released on POSIX systems
supporting anonymous memory mappings.  Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 17825
.. date: 9322
.. nonce: toRoZf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Cursor "^" is correctly positioned for SyntaxError and IndentationError.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9321
.. nonce: nfw3S8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a better error when non-unicode codecs are used for a file's coding
cookie.

..

.. bpo: 17976
.. date: 9320
.. nonce: w402Bf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed potential problem with file.write() not detecting IO error by
inspecting the return value of fwrite().  Based on patches by Jaakko Moisio
and Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 14432
.. date: 9319
.. nonce: kZ1mYr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Generator now clears the borrowed reference to the thread state. Fix a crash
when a generator is created in a C thread that is destroyed while the
generator is still used. The issue was that a generator contains a frame,
and the frame kept a reference to the Python state of the destroyed C
thread. The crash occurs when a trace function is setup.

..

.. bpo: 19932
.. date: 9318
.. nonce: ZU_tXW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix typo in import.h, missing whitespaces in function prototypes.

..

.. bpo: 19638
.. date: 9317
.. nonce: lh5Awt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crash / undefined behaviour from huge (more than 2 billion
characters) input strings in _Py_dg_strtod.

..

.. bpo: 12546
.. date: 9316
.. nonce: kDqF_s
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow \x00 to be used as a fill character when using str, int, float, and
complex __format__ methods.

..

.. bpo: 10744
.. date: 9315
.. nonce: kfV0wm
.. section: Library

Fix PEP 3118 format strings on ctypes objects with a nontrivial shape.

..

.. bpo: 7776
.. date: 9314
.. nonce: DFUgrv
.. section: Library

Backport Fix ``Host:'' header and reconnection when using
http.client.HTTPConnection.set_tunnel() from Python 3.  Patch by Nikolaus
Rath.

..

.. bpo: 21306
.. date: 9313
.. nonce: 8ABvGX
.. section: Library

Backport hmac.compare_digest from Python 3. This is part of PEP 466.

..

.. bpo: 21470
.. date: 9312
.. nonce: uH-yCD
.. section: Library

Do a better job seeding the random number generator by using enough bytes to
span the full state space of the Mersenne Twister.

..

.. bpo: 21469
.. date: 9311
.. nonce: _fFGuq
.. section: Library

Reduced the risk of false positives in robotparser by checking to make sure
that robots.txt has been read or does not exist prior to returning True in
can_fetch().

..

.. bpo: 21321
.. date: 9310
.. nonce: wUkTON
.. section: Library

itertools.islice() now releases the reference to the source iterator when
the slice is exhausted.  Patch by Anton Afanasyev.

..

.. bpo: 9291
.. date: 9309
.. nonce: QlHuPo
.. section: Library

Do not attempt to re-encode mimetype data read from registry in ANSI mode.
Initial patches by Dmitry Jemerov & Vladimir Iofik.

..

.. bpo: 21349
.. date: 9308
.. nonce: G6dnGO
.. section: Library

Passing a memoryview to _winreg.SetValueEx now correctly raises a TypeError
where it previously crashed the interpreter. Patch by Brian Kearns

..

.. bpo: 21529
.. date: 9307
.. nonce: 57R_Fc
.. section: Library

Fix arbitrary memory access in JSONDecoder.raw_decode with a negative second
parameter. Bug reported by Guido Vranken. (See also: CVE-2014-4616)

..

.. bpo: 21172
.. date: 9306
.. nonce: dQ7yY7
.. section: Library

isinstance check relaxed from dict to collections.Mapping.

..

.. bpo: 21191
.. date: 9305
.. nonce: T8gLBH
.. section: Library

In os.fdopen, never close the file descriptor when an exception happens.

..

.. bpo: 21149
.. date: 9304
.. nonce: cnjwMR
.. section: Library

Improved thread-safety in logging cleanup during interpreter shutdown.
Thanks to Devin Jeanpierre for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9303
.. nonce: WKcVnZ
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow bug in strop.expandtabs. You shouldn't be using this
module!

..

.. bpo: 20145
.. date: 9302
.. nonce: JeZoJn
.. section: Library

`assertRaisesRegex` now raises a TypeError if the second argument is not a
string or compiled regex.

..

.. bpo: 21058
.. date: 9301
.. nonce: SqznP1
.. section: Library

Fix a leak of file descriptor in tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile(), close the
file descriptor if os.fdopen() fails

..

.. bpo: 20283
.. date: 9300
.. nonce: v0Vs9V
.. section: Library

RE pattern methods now accept the string keyword parameters as documented.
The pattern and source keyword parameters are left as deprecated aliases.

..

.. bpo: 11599
.. date: 9299
.. nonce: 9QOXf4
.. section: Library

When an external command (e.g. compiler) fails, distutils now prints out the
whole command line (instead of just the command name) if the environment
variable DISTUTILS_DEBUG is set.

..

.. bpo: 4931
.. date: 9298
.. nonce: uF10hr
.. section: Library

distutils should not produce unhelpful "error: None" messages anymore.
distutils.util.grok_environment_error is kept but doc-deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9297
.. nonce: mdcWGA
.. section: Library

Improve the random module's default seeding to use 256 bits of entropy from
os.urandom().  This was already done for Python 3, mildly improving security
with a bigger seed space.

..

.. bpo: 15618
.. date: 9296
.. nonce: r5_ACR
.. section: Library

Make turtle.py compatible with 'from __future__ import unicode_literals'.
Initial patch by Juancarlo Añez.

..

.. bpo: 20501
.. date: 9295
.. nonce: Jwfgph
.. section: Library

fileinput module no longer reads whole file into memory when using
fileinput.hook_encoded.

..

.. bpo: 6815
.. date: 9294
.. nonce: poU-vm
.. section: Library

os.path.expandvars() now supports non-ASCII Unicode environment variables
names and values.

..

.. bpo: 20635
.. date: 9293
.. nonce: ZKwOpn
.. section: Library

Fixed grid_columnconfigure() and grid_rowconfigure() methods of Tkinter
widgets to work in wantobjects=True mode.

..

.. bpo: 17671
.. date: 9292
.. nonce: 8tHRKJ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash when use non-initialized io.BufferedRWPair. Based on patch by
Stephen Tu.

..

.. bpo: 8478
.. date: 9291
.. nonce: OS7q1h
.. section: Library

Untokenizer.compat processes first token from iterator input. Patch based on
lines from Georg Brandl, Eric Snow, and Gareth Rees.

..

.. bpo: 20594
.. date: 9290
.. nonce: BVHxPd
.. section: Library

Avoid name clash with the libc function posix_close.

..

.. bpo: 19856
.. date: 9289
.. nonce: jFhYW_
.. section: Library

shutil.move() failed to move a directory to other directory on Windows if
source name ends with os.altsep.

..

.. bpo: 14983
.. date: 9288
.. nonce: H_gs8w
.. section: Library

email.generator now always adds a line end after each MIME boundary marker,
instead of doing so only when there is an epilogue.  This fixes an RFC
compliance bug and solves an issue with signed MIME parts.

..

.. bpo: 20013
.. date: 9287
.. nonce: erNy8V
.. section: Library

Some imap servers disconnect if the current mailbox is deleted, and imaplib
did not handle that case gracefully.  Now it handles the 'bye' correctly.

..

.. bpo: 20426
.. date: 9286
.. nonce: f0ozAP
.. section: Library

When passing the re.DEBUG flag, re.compile() displays the debug output every
time it is called, regardless of the compilation cache.

..

.. bpo: 20368
.. date: 9285
.. nonce: BlXEFo
.. section: Library

The null character now correctly passed from Tcl to Python (in unicode
strings only).  Improved error handling in variables-related commands.

..

.. bpo: 20435
.. date: 9284
.. nonce: _UNhlH
.. section: Library

Fix _pyio.StringIO.getvalue() to take into account newline translation
settings.

..

.. bpo: 20288
.. date: 9283
.. nonce: 6zUZe3
.. section: Library

fix handling of invalid numeric charrefs in HTMLParser.

..

.. bpo: 19456
.. date: 9282
.. nonce: 6HhsFx
.. section: Library

ntpath.join() now joins relative paths correctly when a drive is present.

..

.. bpo: 8260
.. date: 9281
.. nonce: nf7gg9
.. section: Library

The read(), readline() and readlines() methods of codecs.StreamReader
returned incomplete data when were called after readline() or read(size).
Based on patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 20374
.. date: 9280
.. nonce: EWofHb
.. section: Library

Fix build with GNU readline >= 6.3.

..

.. bpo: 14548
.. date: 9279
.. nonce: ClAkmE
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing finalizers check pid before running to cope with
possibility of gc running just after fork. (Backport from 3.x.)

..

.. bpo: 20262
.. date: 9278
.. nonce: co0t1R
.. section: Library

Warnings are raised now when duplicate names are added in the ZIP file or
too long ZIP file comment is truncated.

..

.. bpo: 20270
.. date: 9277
.. nonce: hDccjr
.. section: Library

urllib and urlparse now support empty ports.

..

.. bpo: 20243
.. date: 9276
.. nonce: nApKCK
.. section: Library

TarFile no longer raise ReadError when opened in write mode.

..

.. bpo: 20245
.. date: 9275
.. nonce: 93kf_h
.. section: Library

The open functions in the tarfile module now correctly handle empty mode.

..

.. bpo: 20086
.. date: 9274
.. nonce: RV3SGi
.. section: Library

Restored the use of locale-independent mapping instead of locale-dependent
str.lower() in locale.normalize().

..

.. bpo: 20246
.. date: 9273
.. nonce: CC8uTq
.. section: Library

Fix buffer overflow in socket.recvfrom_into.

..

.. bpo: 19082
.. date: 9272
.. nonce: Qv6W7t
.. section: Library

Working SimpleXMLRPCServer and xmlrpclib examples, both in modules and
documentation.

..

.. bpo: 13107
.. date: 9271
.. nonce: YgEEME
.. section: Library

argparse and optparse no longer raises an exception when output a help on
environment with too small COLUMNS.  Based on patch by Elazar Gershuni.

..

.. bpo: 20207
.. date: 9270
.. nonce: ziIyF1
.. section: Library

Always disable SSLv2 except when PROTOCOL_SSLv2 is explicitly asked for.

..

.. bpo: 20072
.. date: 9269
.. nonce: FzVG15
.. section: Library

Fixed multiple errors in tkinter with wantobjects is False.

..

.. bpo: 1065986
.. date: 9268
.. nonce: pSaw56
.. section: Library

pydoc can now handle unicode strings.

..

.. bpo: 16039
.. date: 9267
.. nonce: Cy3_BL
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: Change use of readline in imaplib module to limit line
length.  Patch by Emil Lind.

..

.. bpo: 19422
.. date: 9266
.. nonce: 1dRaPS
.. section: Library

Explicitly disallow non-SOCK_STREAM sockets in the ssl module, rather than
silently let them emit clear text data.

..

.. bpo: 20027
.. date: 9265
.. nonce: dtB7OG
.. section: Library

Fixed locale aliases for devanagari locales.

..

.. bpo: 20067
.. date: 9264
.. nonce: MlnlYd
.. section: Library

Tkinter variables now work when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19020
.. date: 9263
.. nonce: _16K__
.. section: Library

Tkinter now uses splitlist() instead of split() in configure methods.

..

.. bpo: 12226
.. date: 9262
.. nonce: -vXCBM
.. section: Library

HTTPS is now used by default when connecting to PyPI.

..

.. bpo: 20048
.. date: 9261
.. nonce: YvvUoW
.. section: Library

Fixed ZipExtFile.peek() when it is called on the boundary of the uncompress
buffer and read() goes through more than one readbuffer.

..

.. bpo: 20034
.. date: 9260
.. nonce: GlYpNX
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping to most recent locale.alias file from X.org
distribution using makelocalealias.py.

..

.. bpo: 5815
.. date: 9259
.. nonce: FxSb0P
.. section: Library

Fixed support for locales with modifiers.  Fixed support for locale
encodings with hyphens.

..

.. bpo: 20026
.. date: 9258
.. nonce: KO1jB6
.. section: Library

Fix the sqlite module to handle correctly invalid isolation level (wrong
type).

..

.. bpo: 18829
.. date: 9257
.. nonce: QPwJFn
.. section: Library

csv.Dialect() now checks type for delimiter, escapechar and quotechar
fields.  Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19855
.. date: 9256
.. nonce: TtBUO6
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() on Unix now looks on the PATH for the executables used to
find the mac address, with /sbin and /usr/sbin as fallbacks.

..

.. bpo: 20007
.. date: 9255
.. nonce: IaSnPo
.. section: Library

HTTPResponse.read(0) no more prematurely closes connection. Original patch
by Simon Sapin.

..

.. bpo: 19912
.. date: 9254
.. nonce: TviIPi
.. section: Library

Fixed numerous bugs in ntpath.splitunc().

..

.. bpo: 19623
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: cPL8XH
.. section: Library

Fixed writing to unseekable files in the aifc module. Fixed writing 'ulaw'
(lower case) compressed AIFC files.

..

.. bpo: 17919
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: H5iGXv
.. section: Library

select.poll.register() again works with poll.POLLNVAL on AIX. Fixed integer
overflow in the eventmask parameter.

..

.. bpo: 17200
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: y1euZh
.. section: Library

telnetlib's read_until and expect timeout was broken by the fix to Issue
#14635 in Python 2.7.4 to be interpreted as milliseconds instead of seconds
when the platform supports select.poll (ie: everywhere). It is now treated
as seconds once again.

..

.. bpo: 19099
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: U4CHJk
.. section: Library

The struct module now supports Unicode format strings.

..

.. bpo: 19878
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: 7oVPCy
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in bz2 module after calling __init__ twice with non-existent
filename. Initial patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 16373
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: 9drXFZ
.. section: Library

Prevent infinite recursion for ABC Set class comparisons.

..

.. bpo: 19138
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: xwKrX_
.. section: Library

doctest's IGNORE_EXCEPTION_DETAIL now allows a match when no exception
detail exists (no colon following the exception's name, or a colon does
follow but no text follows the colon).

..

.. bpo: 16231
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: BospTf
.. section: Library

Fixed pickle.Pickler to only fallback to its default pickling behaviour when
Pickler.persistent_id returns None, but not for any other false values.
This allows false values other than None to be used as persistent IDs.  This
behaviour is consistent with cPickle.

..

.. bpo: 11508
.. date: 9245
.. nonce: fx7Abs
.. section: Library

Fixed uuid.getnode() and uuid.uuid1() on environment with virtual interface.
Original patch by Kent Frazier.

..

.. bpo: 11489
.. date: 9244
.. nonce: 3ZQHi8
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now accepts lone surrogates.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9243
.. nonce: mrzJif
.. section: Library

Fix test.test_support.bind_port() to not cause an error when Python was
compiled on a system with SO_REUSEPORT defined in the headers but run on a
system with an OS kernel that does not support that new socket option.

..

.. bpo: 19633
.. date: 9242
.. nonce: XJNQit
.. section: Library

Fixed writing not compressed 16- and 32-bit wave files on big-endian
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19449
.. date: 9241
.. nonce: F2TbC_
.. section: Library

in csv's writerow, handle non-string keys when generating the error message
that certain keys are not in the 'fieldnames' list.

..

.. bpo: 12853
.. date: 9240
.. nonce: Hf7EYH
.. section: Library

Fix NameError in distutils.command.upload.

..

.. bpo: 19523
.. date: 9239
.. nonce: tNiY9i
.. section: Library

Closed FileHandler leak which occurred when delay was set.

..

.. bpo: 1575020
.. date: 9238
.. nonce: skWyvl
.. section: Library

Fixed support of 24-bit wave files on big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19480
.. date: 9237
.. nonce: MY3dmW
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now accepts all valid start-tag names as defined by the HTML5
standard.

..

.. bpo: 17827
.. date: 9236
.. nonce: HJGFDL
.. section: Library

Add the missing documentation for ``codecs.encode`` and ``codecs.decode``.

..

.. bpo: 6157
.. date: 9235
.. nonce: ZW67ae
.. section: Library

Fixed Tkinter.Text.debug().  Original patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 6160
.. date: 9234
.. nonce: Mr5UuA
.. section: Library

The bbox() method of tkinter.Spinbox now returns a tuple of integers instead
of a string.  Based on patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 19286
.. date: 9233
.. nonce: TUZetF
.. section: Library

Directories in ``package_data`` are no longer added to the filelist,
preventing failure outlined in the ticket.

..

.. bpo: 6676
.. date: 9232
.. nonce: CJu5On
.. section: Library

Ensure a meaningful exception is raised when attempting to parse more than
one XML document per pyexpat xmlparser instance. (Original patches by
Hirokazu Yamamoto and Amaury Forgeot d'Arc, with suggested wording by David
Gutteridge)

..

.. bpo: 21311
.. date: 9231
.. nonce: JsDF8H
.. section: Library

Avoid exception in _osx_support with non-standard compiler configurations.
Patch by John Szakmeister.

..

.. bpo: 3561
.. date: 9230
.. nonce: DuNr6C
.. section: Tools/Demos

The Windows installer now has an option, off by default, for placing the
Python installation into the system "Path" environment variable. This was
backported from Python 3.3.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9229
.. nonce: _-ge-g
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for ``yield from`` to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9228
.. nonce: dpFbyZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for the PEP 465 matrix multiplication operator to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 19936
.. date: 9227
.. nonce: moet1K
.. section: Tools/Demos

Added executable bits or shebang lines to Python scripts which requires
them.  Disable executable bits and shebang lines in test and benchmark files
in order to prevent using a random system python, and in source files of
modules which don't provide command line interface.

..

.. bpo: 18104
.. date: 9226
.. nonce: 8Fj9Pf
.. section: IDLE

Add idlelib/idle_test/htest.py with a few sample tests to begin
consolidating and improving human-validated tests of Idle. Change other
files as needed to work with htest.  Running the module as __main__ runs all
tests.

..

.. bpo: 21139
.. date: 9225
.. nonce: kqetng
.. section: IDLE

Change default paragraph width to 72, the PEP 8 recommendation.

..

.. bpo: 21284
.. date: 9224
.. nonce: KKJfmv
.. section: IDLE

Paragraph reformat test passes after user changes reformat width.

..

.. bpo: 20406
.. date: 9223
.. nonce: AgBe_5
.. section: IDLE

Use Python application icons for Idle window title bars. Patch mostly by
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 21029
.. date: 9222
.. nonce: JnlAAt
.. section: IDLE

Occurrences of "print" are now consistently colored as being a keyword (the
colorizer doesn't know if print functions are enabled in the source).

..

.. bpo: 17721
.. date: 9221
.. nonce: 8Jh8C1
.. section: IDLE

Remove non-functional configuration dialog help button until we make it
actually gives some help when clicked. Patch by Guilherme Simões.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 9220
.. nonce: 9m6ZhV
.. section: IDLE

Add Python version to Idle editor window title bar. Original patches by
Edmond Burnett and Kent Johnson.

..

.. bpo: 20058
.. date: 9219
.. nonce: KnDlhH
.. section: IDLE

sys.stdin.readline() in IDLE now always returns only one line.

..

.. bpo: 19481
.. date: 9218
.. nonce: b5EHmn
.. section: IDLE

print() of unicode, str or bytearray subclass instance in IDLE no more
hangs.

..

.. bpo: 18270
.. date: 9217
.. nonce: lu6dRW
.. section: IDLE

Prevent possible IDLE AttributeError on OS X when no initial shell window is
present.

..

.. bpo: 17654
.. date: 9216
.. nonce: NbzhNS
.. section: IDLE

Ensure IDLE menus are customized properly on OS X for non-framework builds
and for all variants of Tk.

..

.. bpo: 17752
.. date: 9215
.. nonce: P8iG44
.. section: Tests

Fix distutils tests when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 18604
.. date: 9214
.. nonce: Q00Xrj
.. section: Tests

Consolidated checks for GUI availability.  All platforms now at least check
whether Tk can be instantiated when the GUI resource is requested.

..

.. bpo: 20946
.. date: 9213
.. nonce: iI4MlK
.. section: Tests

Correct alignment assumptions of some ctypes tests.

..

.. bpo: 20743
.. date: 9212
.. nonce: hxZQUf
.. section: Tests

Fix a reference leak in test_tcl.

..

.. bpo: 20510
.. date: 9211
.. nonce: X9p_K2
.. section: Tests

Rewrote test_exit in test_sys to match existing comments, use modern
unittest features, and use helpers from test.script_helper instead of using
subprocess directly.  Initial patch by Gareth Rees.

..

.. bpo: 20532
.. date: 9210
.. nonce: qsOt4d
.. section: Tests

Tests which use _testcapi now are marked as CPython only.

..

.. bpo: 19920
.. date: 9209
.. nonce: suOIC7
.. section: Tests

Added tests for TarFile.list().  Based on patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19990
.. date: 9208
.. nonce: Lp1MVj
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the imghdr module.  Based on patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19804
.. date: 9207
.. nonce: xIHIl7
.. section: Tests

The test_find_mac test in test_uuid is now skipped if the ifconfig
executable is not available.

..

.. bpo: 19886
.. date: 9206
.. nonce: nqDFRC
.. section: Tests

Use better estimated memory requirements for bigmem tests.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9205
.. nonce: 6LQ8qX
.. section: Tests

Backported tests for Tkinter variables.

..

.. bpo: 19320
.. date: 9204
.. nonce: 9x_cw5
.. section: Tests

test_tcl no longer fails when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19683
.. date: 9203
.. nonce: iD76Cq
.. section: Tests

Removed empty tests from test_minidom.  Initial patch by Ajitesh Gupta.

..

.. bpo: 19928
.. date: 9202
.. nonce: dwOQ95
.. section: Tests

Implemented a test for repr() of cell objects.

..

.. bpo: 19595
.. date: 9201
.. nonce: q5oNE_
.. section: Tests

Re-enabled a long-disabled test in test_winsound. (See also: bpo-19987)

..

.. bpo: 19588
.. date: 9200
.. nonce: EXKxpC
.. section: Tests

Fixed tests in test_random that were silently skipped most of the time.
Patch by Julian Gindi.

..

.. bpo: 17883
.. date: 9199
.. nonce: rQfRpP
.. section: Tests

Tweak test_tcl testLoadWithUNC to skip the test in the event of a permission
error on Windows and to properly report other skip conditions.

..

.. bpo: 17883
.. date: 9198
.. nonce: 12qN1i
.. section: Tests

Backported _is_gui_available() in test.test_support to avoid hanging Windows
buildbots on test_ttk_guionly.

..

.. bpo: 18702
.. date: 9197
.. nonce: a2jP-V
.. section: Tests

All skipped tests now reported as skipped. (See also: bpo-19572)

..

.. bpo: 19085
.. date: 9196
.. nonce: Gcl9XX
.. section: Tests

Added basic tests for all tkinter widget options.

..

.. bpo: 20605
.. date: 9195
.. nonce: uef5pT
.. section: Tests

Make test_socket getaddrinfo OS X segfault test more robust.

..

.. bpo: 20939
.. date: 9194
.. nonce: x3KQ35
.. section: Tests

Avoid various network test failures due to new redirect of
http://www.python.org/ to https://www.python.org: use http://www.example.com
instead.

..

.. bpo: 21093
.. date: 9193
.. nonce: CcpRim
.. section: Tests

Prevent failures of ctypes test_macholib on OS X if a copy of libz exists in
$HOME/lib or /usr/local/lib.

..

.. bpo: 21285
.. date: 9192
.. nonce: cU9p2E
.. section: Build

Refactor and fix curses configure check to always search in a ncursesw
directory.

..

.. bpo: 20255
.. date: 9191
.. nonce: P9HfTR
.. section: Documentation

Update the about and bugs pages.

..

.. bpo: 18840
.. date: 9190
.. nonce: _2UItV
.. section: Documentation

Introduce the json module in the tutorial, and de-emphasize the pickle
module.

..

.. bpo: 19795
.. date: 9189
.. nonce: z5sbe1
.. section: Documentation

Improved markup of True/False constants.

..

.. bpo: 21303
.. date: 9188
.. nonce: AHY5As
.. section: Windows

Updated the version of Tcl/Tk included in the installer from 8.5.2 to
8.5.15. (See also: bpo-20565)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9187
.. nonce: FhpkVS
.. section: macOS

As of 2.7.8, the 32-bit-only installer will support OS X 10.5 and later
systems as is currently done for Python 3.x installers. For 2.7.7 only, we
will provide three installers: the legacy deprecated 10.3+ 32-bit-only
format; the newer 10.5+ 32-bit-only format; and the unchanged 10.6+
64-/32-bit format. Although binary installers will no longer be available
from python.org as of 2.7.8, it will still be possible to build from source
on 10.3.9 and 10.4 systems if necessary. See Mac/BuildScript/README.txt for
more information.
