.. bpo: 38945
.. date: 2019-12-01-22-44-40
.. nonce: ztmNXc
.. release date: 2020-04-04
.. section: Security

Newline characters have been escaped when performing uu encoding to prevent
them from overflowing into to content section of the encoded file. This
prevents malicious or accidental modification of data during the decoding
process.

..

.. bpo: 38804
.. date: 2019-11-15-00-54-42
.. nonce: vjbM8V
.. section: Security

Fixes a ReDoS vulnerability in :mod:`http.cookiejar`. Patch by Ben Caller.

..

.. bpo: 38535
.. date: 2019-10-20-12-43-48
.. nonce: ESMkVN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed line numbers and column offsets for AST nodes for calls without
arguments in decorators.

..

.. bpo: 38576
.. date: 2020-03-18-01-30-50
.. nonce: cvI68q
.. section: Library

Disallow control characters in hostnames in http.client, addressing
CVE-2019-18348. Such potentially malicious header injection URLs now cause a
InvalidURL to be raised.

..

.. bpo: 27973
.. date: 2019-12-30-07-59-34
.. nonce: mgWXH1
.. section: Library

Fix urllib.urlretrieve failing on subsequent ftp transfers from the same
host.

..

.. bpo: 38730
.. date: 2019-11-06-20-53-54
.. nonce: UQsW_r
.. section: Build

Fix problems identified by GCC's ``-Wstringop-truncation`` warning.

..

.. bpo: 37025
.. date: 2019-10-04-03-46-36
.. nonce: tLheEe
.. section: Windows

``AddRefActCtx()`` was needlessly being checked for failure in
``PC/dl_nt.c``.

..

.. bpo: 38295
.. date: 2019-12-17-03-43-04
.. nonce: hgDvlB
.. section: macOS

Prevent failure of test_relative_path in test_py_compile on macOS Catalina.

..

.. bpo: 38540
.. date: 2019-10-21-09-24-03
.. nonce: 314N_T
.. section: C API

Fixed possible leak in :c:func:`PyArg_Parse` and similar functions for
format units ``"es#"`` and ``"et#"`` when the macro
:c:macro:`PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN` is not defined.
