.. bpo: 18603
.. date: 9182
.. nonce: 7SMyAQ
.. release date: 2013-10-26
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that PyOS_mystricmp and PyOS_mystrnicmp are in the Python executable
and not removed by the linker's optimizer.

..

.. bpo: 19279
.. date: 9181
.. nonce: bXi_a1
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-7 decoder no more produces illegal unicode strings.

..

.. bpo: 18739
.. date: 9180
.. nonce: ZUuspY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an inconsistency between math.log(n) and math.log(long(n)); the results
could be off from one another by a ulp or two.

..

.. bpo: 13461
.. date: 9179
.. nonce: ExV3tX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the "replace" error handler on 64-bit platforms. Patch by
Yogesh Chaudhari.

..

.. bpo: 15866
.. date: 9178
.. nonce: meZHE-
.. section: Core and Builtins

The xmlcharrefreplace error handler no more produces two XML entities for a
non-BMP character on narrow build.

..

.. bpo: 18184
.. date: 9177
.. nonce: xLNVG3
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyUnicode_FromFormat() and PyUnicode_FromFormatV() now raise OverflowError
when an argument of %c format is out of range.

..

.. bpo: 18137
.. date: 9176
.. nonce: a_Vsor
.. section: Core and Builtins

Detect integer overflow on precision in float.__format__() and
complex.__format__().

..

.. bpo: 18038
.. date: 9175
.. nonce: Q8prhd
.. section: Core and Builtins

SyntaxError raised during compilation sources with illegal encoding now
always contains an encoding name.

..

.. bpo: 18019
.. date: 9174
.. nonce: HdAInl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in the repr of dictionaries containing their own views.

..

.. bpo: 18427
.. date: 9173
.. nonce: XEBN6L
.. section: Core and Builtins

str.replace could crash the interpreter with huge strings.

..

.. bpo: 19393
.. date: 9172
.. nonce: ytbAwl
.. section: Library

Fix symtable.symtable function to not be confused when there are functions
or classes named "top".

..

.. bpo: 19327
.. date: 9171
.. nonce: S7Xvxs
.. section: Library

Fixed the working of regular expressions with too big charset.

..

.. bpo: 19350
.. date: 9170
.. nonce: MCCKjK
.. section: Library

Increasing the test coverage of macurl2path. Patch by Colin Williams.

..

.. bpo: 19352
.. date: 9169
.. nonce: 3TfAkY
.. section: Library

Fix unittest discovery when a module can be reached through several paths
(e.g. under Debian/Ubuntu with virtualenv).

..

.. bpo: 15207
.. date: 9168
.. nonce: piOBBi
.. section: Library

Fix mimetypes to read from correct part of Windows registry Original patch
by Dave Chambers

..

.. bpo: 8964
.. date: 9167
.. nonce: dzU2FB
.. section: Library

fix platform._sys_version to handle IronPython 2.6+. Patch by Martin
Matusiak.

..

.. bpo: 16038
.. date: 9166
.. nonce: TZGbSo
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: ftplib: Limit amount of data read by limiting the call to
readline().  Original patch by Michał Jastrzębski and Giampaolo Rodola.

..

.. bpo: 19276
.. date: 9165
.. nonce: Y69Qmv
.. section: Library

Fixed the wave module on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 18458
.. date: 9164
.. nonce: 6Bs0gr
.. section: Library

Prevent crashes with newer versions of libedit.  Its readline emulation has
changed from 0-based indexing to 1-based like gnu readline. Original patch
by Ronald Oussoren.

..

.. bpo: 18919
.. date: 9163
.. nonce: rIO3MQ
.. section: Library

If the close() method of a writer in the sunau or wave module failed, second
invocation of close() and destructor no more raise an exception.  Second
invocation of close() on sunau writer now has no effects. The aifc module
now accepts lower case of names of the 'ulaw' and 'alaw' codecs.

..

.. bpo: 19131
.. date: 9162
.. nonce: eZXzpr
.. section: Library

The aifc module now correctly reads and writes sampwidth of compressed
streams.

..

.. bpo: 19158
.. date: 9161
.. nonce: GvkZuU
.. section: Library

A rare race in BoundedSemaphore could allow .release() too often.

..

.. bpo: 18037
.. date: 9160
.. nonce: pmZRS7
.. section: Library

2to3 now escapes '\u' and '\U' in native strings.

..

.. bpo: 19137
.. date: 9159
.. nonce: kdJchn
.. section: Library

The pprint module now correctly formats empty set and frozenset and
instances of set and frozenset subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 16040
.. date: 9158
.. nonce: xg3xlX
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: nntplib: Limit maximum line lengths to 2048 to prevent
readline() calls from consuming too much memory.  Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 12641
.. date: 9157
.. nonce: r9sIyX
.. section: Library

Avoid passing "-mno-cygwin" to the mingw32 compiler, except when necessary.
Patch by Oscar Benjamin.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9156
.. nonce: 08TsG5
.. section: Library

Properly initialize all fields of a SSL object after allocation.

..

.. bpo: 4366
.. date: 9155
.. nonce: lDEdfK
.. section: Library

Fix building extensions on all platforms when --enable-shared is used.

..

.. bpo: 18950
.. date: 9154
.. nonce: AoZ5GZ
.. section: Library

Fix miscellaneous bugs in the sunau module. Au_read.readframes() now updates
current file position and reads correct number of frames from multichannel
stream.  Au_write.writeframesraw() now correctly updates current file
position.  Au_read and Au_write now correctly work with file object if start
file position is not a zero.

..

.. bpo: 18050
.. date: 9153
.. nonce: LUKrBT
.. section: Library

Fixed an incompatibility of the re module with Python 2.7.3 and older
binaries.

..

.. bpo: 19037
.. date: 9152
.. nonce: OfBhoU
.. section: Library

The mailbox module now makes all changes to maildir files before moving them
into place, to avoid race conditions with other programs that may be
accessing the maildir directory.

..

.. bpo: 14984
.. date: 9151
.. nonce: iRbFp4
.. section: Library

On POSIX systems, when netrc is called without a filename argument (and
therefore is reading the user's $HOME/.netrc file), it now enforces the same
security rules as typical ftp clients: the .netrc file must be owned by the
user that owns the process and must not be readable by any other user.

..

.. bpo: 17324
.. date: 9150
.. nonce: 0PkOTi
.. section: Library

Fix http.server's request handling case on trailing '/'. Patch contributed
by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19018
.. date: 9149
.. nonce: mntKOW
.. section: Library

The heapq.merge() function no longer suppresses IndexError in the underlying
iterables.

..

.. bpo: 18784
.. date: 9148
.. nonce: ocU3GG
.. section: Library

The uuid module no more attempts to load libc via ctypes.CDLL, if all
necessary functions are already found in libuuid. Patch by Evgeny Sologubov.

..

.. bpo: 14971
.. date: 9147
.. nonce: cc8xNA
.. section: Library

unittest test discovery no longer gets confused when a function has a
different __name__ than its name in the TestCase class dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 18672
.. date: 9146
.. nonce: CIblDh
.. section: Library

Fixed format specifiers for Py_ssize_t in debugging output in the _sre
module.

..

.. bpo: 18830
.. date: 9145
.. nonce: Uzi-Y4
.. section: Library

inspect.getclasstree() no more produces duplicated entries even when input
list contains duplicates.

..

.. bpo: 18909
.. date: 9144
.. nonce: XSu98N
.. section: Library

Fix _tkinter.tkapp.interpaddr() on Windows 64-bit, don't cast 64-bit pointer
to long (32 bits).

..

.. bpo: 18876
.. date: 9143
.. nonce: 30Ist9
.. section: Library

The FileIO.mode attribute now better reflects the actual mode under which
the file was opened.  Patch by Erik Bray.

..

.. bpo: 18851
.. date: 9142
.. nonce: -YsF6X
.. section: Library

Avoid a double close of subprocess pipes when the child process fails
starting.

..

.. bpo: 18418
.. date: 9141
.. nonce: _SFG8w
.. section: Library

After fork(), reinit all threads states, not only active ones. Patch by A.
Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 11973
.. date: 9140
.. nonce: uPtBvG
.. section: Library

Fix a problem in kevent. The flags and fflags fields are now properly
handled as unsigned.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 9139
.. nonce: TF5mD7
.. section: Library

Fixed some tkinter incompatibilities with Tcl/Tk 8.6.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 9138
.. nonce: WqSHdP
.. section: Library

Tkinter's splitlist() and split() methods now accept Tcl_Obj argument.

..

.. bpo: 17119
.. date: 9137
.. nonce: sfp47f
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflows when processing large Unicode strings and tuples in
the tkinter module.

..

.. bpo: 15233
.. date: 9136
.. nonce: 8YQW0-
.. section: Library

Python now guarantees that callables registered with the atexit module will
be called in a deterministic order.

..

.. bpo: 18747
.. date: 9135
.. nonce: tPZkbG
.. section: Library

Re-seed OpenSSL's pseudo-random number generator after fork. A
pthread_atfork() parent handler is used to seed the PRNG with pid, time and
some stack data.

..

.. bpo: 8865
.. date: 9134
.. nonce: cKBSJh
.. section: Library

Concurrent invocation of select.poll.poll() now raises a RuntimeError
exception.  Patch by Christian Schubert.

..

.. bpo: 13461
.. date: 9133
.. nonce: nLeS2R
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the TextIOWrapper.tell method on 64-bit platforms.  Patch by
Yogesh Chaudhari.

..

.. bpo: 18777
.. date: 9132
.. nonce: VLsjOw
.. section: Library

The ssl module now uses the new CRYPTO_THREADID API of OpenSSL 1.0.0+
instead of the deprecated CRYPTO id callback function.

..

.. bpo: 18768
.. date: 9131
.. nonce: r3TSCo
.. section: Library

Correct doc string of RAND_edg(). Patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 18178
.. date: 9130
.. nonce: i4hnf-
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes on BSD. dlmalloc.c was compiled twice which broke malloc weak
symbols.

..

.. bpo: 18709
.. date: 9129
.. nonce: DWzpRe
.. section: Library

Fix CVE-2013-4238. The SSL module now handles NULL bytes inside
subjectAltName correctly. Formerly the module has used OpenSSL's
GENERAL_NAME_print() function to get the string representation of ASN.1
strings for ``rfc822Name`` (email), ``dNSName`` (DNS) and
``uniformResourceIdentifier`` (URI).

..

.. bpo: 18756
.. date: 9128
.. nonce: moRUfX
.. section: Library

Improve error reporting in os.urandom() when the failure is due to something
else than /dev/urandom not existing (for example, exhausting the file
descriptor limit).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9127
.. nonce: b9GShY
.. section: Library

Fix tkinter regression introduced by the security fix in issue #16248.

..

.. bpo: 18676
.. date: 9126
.. nonce: WAq1iB
.. section: Library

Change 'positive' to 'non-negative' in queue.py put and get docstrings and
ValueError messages. Patch by Zhongyue Luo

..

.. bpo: 17998
.. date: 9125
.. nonce: hIbru5
.. section: Library

Fix an internal error in regular expression engine.

..

.. bpo: 17557
.. date: 9124
.. nonce: s6BEMI
.. section: Library

Fix os.getgroups() to work with the modified behavior of getgroups(2) on OS
X 10.8.  Original patch by Mateusz Lenik.

..

.. bpo: 18455
.. date: 9123
.. nonce: t1b0R_
.. section: Library

multiprocessing should not retry connect() with same socket.

..

.. bpo: 18513
.. date: 9122
.. nonce: 12JUZi
.. section: Library

Fix behaviour of cmath.rect w.r.t. signed zeros on OS X 10.8 + gcc.

..

.. bpo: 18101
.. date: 9121
.. nonce: hWfUNM
.. section: Library

Tcl.split() now process Unicode strings nested in a tuple as it do with byte
strings.

..

.. bpo: 18347
.. date: 9120
.. nonce: r98Yh-
.. section: Library

ElementTree's html serializer now preserves the case of closing tags.

..

.. bpo: 17261
.. date: 9119
.. nonce: FBzLVh
.. section: Library

Ensure multiprocessing's proxies use proper address.

..

.. bpo: 17097
.. date: 9118
.. nonce: npje1S
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing ignore EINTR.

..

.. bpo: 18155
.. date: 9117
.. nonce: P-O3wv
.. section: Library

The csv module now correctly handles csv files that use a delimiter
character that has a special meaning in regexes, instead of throwing an
exception.

..

.. bpo: 18135
.. date: 9116
.. nonce: AYPE8L
.. section: Library

ssl.SSLSocket.write() now raises an OverflowError if the input string in
longer than 2 gigabytes. The ssl module does not support partial write.

..

.. bpo: 18167
.. date: 9115
.. nonce: CE6ZMO
.. section: Library

cgi.FieldStorage no longer fails to handle multipart/form-data when \r\n
appears at end of 65535 bytes without other newlines.

..

.. bpo: 17403
.. date: 9114
.. nonce: gtIhUd
.. section: Library

urllib.parse.robotparser normalizes the urls before adding to ruleline. This
helps in handling certain types invalid urls in a conservative manner. Patch
contributed by Mher Movsisyan.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9113
.. nonce: jM5EPF
.. section: Library

Implement inequality on weakref.WeakSet.

..

.. bpo: 17981
.. date: 9112
.. nonce: kIczv7
.. section: Library

Closed socket on error in SysLogHandler.

..

.. bpo: 18015
.. date: 9111
.. nonce: 85_YuN
.. section: Library

Fix unpickling of 2.7.3 and 2.7.4 namedtuples.

..

.. bpo: 17754
.. date: 9110
.. nonce: xa6Bc3
.. section: Library

Make ctypes.util.find_library() independent of the locale.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9109
.. nonce: 9OGCJH
.. section: Library

Fix typos in the multiprocessing module.

..

.. bpo: 17269
.. date: 9108
.. nonce: 7LxyKz
.. section: Library

Workaround for socket.getaddrinfo crash on MacOS X with port None or "0" and
flags AI_NUMERICSERV.

..

.. bpo: 18080
.. date: 9107
.. nonce: 8bMdE3
.. section: Library

When building a C extension module on OS X, if the compiler is overridden
with the CC environment variable, use the new compiler as the default for
linking if LDSHARED is not also overridden.  This restores Distutils
behavior introduced in 2.7.3 and inadvertently dropped in 2.7.4.

..

.. bpo: 18071
.. date: 9106
.. nonce: 2FwU0S
.. section: Library

C extension module builds on OS X could fail with TypeError if the Xcode
command line tools were not installed.

..

.. bpo: 18113
.. date: 9105
.. nonce: 7w81KJ
.. section: Library

Fixed a refcount leak in the curses.panel module's set_userptr() method.
Reported by Atsuo Ishimoto.

..

.. bpo: 18849
.. date: 9104
.. nonce: Q0kF0R
.. section: Library

Fixed a Windows-specific tempfile bug where collision with an existing
directory caused mkstemp and related APIs to fail instead of retrying.
Report and fix by Vlad Shcherbina.

..

.. bpo: 19400
.. date: 9103
.. nonce: QAqpk5
.. section: Library

Prevent extension module build failures with Xcode 5 on OS X 10.8+ when
using a universal Python that included a PPC architecture, such as with a
python.org 32-bit-only binary installer.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 9102
.. nonce: i_1Tf_
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now detect Python source code encoding
only in comment lines.

..

.. bpo: 18817
.. date: 9101
.. nonce: yma3Gh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a resource warning in Lib/aifc.py demo.

..

.. bpo: 18439
.. date: 9100
.. nonce: W9DxeL
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make patchcheck work on Windows for ACKS, NEWS.

..

.. bpo: 18448
.. date: 9099
.. nonce: gMA5pg
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a typo in Demo/newmetaclasses/Eiffel.py.

..

.. bpo: 12990
.. date: 9098
.. nonce: E1geL-
.. section: Tools/Demos

The "Python Launcher" on OSX could not launch python scripts that have paths
that include wide characters.

..

.. bpo: 16067
.. date: 9097
.. nonce: xeYOfj
.. section: Build

Add description into MSI file to replace installer's temporary name.

..

.. bpo: 18256
.. date: 9096
.. nonce: PiEkYT
.. section: Build

Compilation fix for recent AIX releases.  Patch by David Edelsohn.

..

.. bpo: 18098
.. date: 9095
.. nonce: KZmfoE
.. section: Build

The deprecated OS X Build Applet.app fails to build on OS X 10.8 systems
because the Apple-deprecated QuickDraw headers have been removed from Xcode
4.  Skip building it in this case.

..

.. bpo: 1584
.. date: 9094
.. nonce: qjDxpR
.. section: Build

Provide options to override default search paths for Tcl and Tk when
building _tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 9093
.. nonce: 9Da_Rj
.. section: Build

Tcl/Tk 8.5.15 is now included with the OS X 10.6+ 64-bit/32-bit installer
for 10.6+.  It is no longer necessary to install a third-party version of
Tcl/Tk 8.5 to work around the problems in the Apple-supplied Tcl/Tk 8.5
shipped in OS X 10.6 and later releases.

..

.. bpo: 19019
.. date: 9092
.. nonce: 5W7lw_
.. section: Build

Change the OS X installer build script to use CFLAGS instead of OPT for
special build options.  By setting OPT, some compiler-specific options like
-fwrapv were overridden and thus not used, which could result in broken
interpreters when building with clang.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 9091
.. nonce: dyLPY9
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now detects Python source code encoding only in comment lines.

..

.. bpo: 18988
.. date: 9090
.. nonce: 6CpesW
.. section: IDLE

The "Tab" key now works when a word is already autocompleted.

..

.. bpo: 18489
.. date: 9089
.. nonce: nOvxOH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for SearchEngine. Original patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18429
.. date: 9088
.. nonce: F1lTq1
.. section: IDLE

Format / Format Paragraph, now works when comment blocks are selected. As
with text blocks, this works best when the selection only includes complete
lines.

..

.. bpo: 18226
.. date: 9087
.. nonce: 5HtrW1
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings and unittests for FormatParagraph.py. Original patches by
Todd Rovito and Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18279
.. date: 9086
.. nonce: UoF-oR
.. section: IDLE

Format - Strip trailing whitespace no longer marks a file as changed when it
has not been changed. This fix followed the addition of a test file
originally written by Phil Webster (the issue's main goal).

..

.. bpo: 18539
.. date: 9085
.. nonce: _ddWOv
.. section: IDLE

Calltips now work for float default arguments.

..

.. bpo: 7136
.. date: 9084
.. nonce: 7horQf
.. section: IDLE

In the Idle File menu, "New Window" is renamed "New File". Patch by Tal
Einat, Roget Serwy, and Todd Rovito.

..

.. bpo: 8515
.. date: 9083
.. nonce: wY13t0
.. section: IDLE

Set __file__ when run file in IDLE. Initial patch by Bruce Frederiksen.

..

.. bpo: 5492
.. date: 9082
.. nonce: LCx7lq
.. section: IDLE

Avoid traceback when exiting IDLE caused by a race condition.

..

.. bpo: 17511
.. date: 9081
.. nonce: 6XqdTH
.. section: IDLE

Keep IDLE find dialog open after clicking "Find Next". Original patch by
Sarah K.

..

.. bpo: 15392
.. date: 9080
.. nonce: rB5VoV
.. section: IDLE

Create a unittest framework for IDLE. Preliminary patch by Rajagopalasarma
Jayakrishnan See Lib/idlelib/idle_test/README.txt for how to run Idle tests.

..

.. bpo: 14146
.. date: 9079
.. nonce: -n5gzd
.. section: IDLE

Highlight source line while debugging on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17532
.. date: 9078
.. nonce: wgA70Z
.. section: IDLE

Always include Options menu for IDLE on OS X. Patch by Guilherme Simões.

..

.. bpo: 18919
.. date: 9077
.. nonce: BOq1BY
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the sunau module.  Unified and extended tests for audio
modules: aifc, sunau and wave.

..

.. bpo: 18792
.. date: 9076
.. nonce: 5RkYdK
.. section: Tests

Use "127.0.0.1" or "::1" instead of "localhost" as much as possible, since
"localhost" goes through a DNS lookup under recent Windows versions.

..

.. bpo: 18357
.. date: 9075
.. nonce: jRiyQA
.. section: Tests

add tests for dictview set difference. Patch by Fraser Tweedale.

..

.. bpo: 11185
.. date: 9074
.. nonce: McIHeT
.. section: Tests

Fix test_wait4 under AIX.  Patch by Sébastien Sablé.

..

.. bpo: 18094
.. date: 9073
.. nonce: VeMh1H
.. section: Tests

test_uuid no more reports skipped tests as passed.

..

.. bpo: 11995
.. date: 9072
.. nonce: varfN1
.. section: Tests

test_pydoc doesn't import all sys.path modules anymore.

..

.. bpo: 18758
.. date: 9071
.. nonce: hMCi7Z
.. section: Documentation

Fixed and improved cross-references.

..

.. bpo: 18718
.. date: 9070
.. nonce: CtpK5H
.. section: Documentation

datetime documentation contradictory on leap second support.

..

.. bpo: 17701
.. date: 9069
.. nonce: FtTZ66
.. section: Documentation

Improving strftime documentation.

..

.. bpo: 17844
.. date: 9068
.. nonce: R4Gssa
.. section: Documentation

Refactor a documentation of Python specific encodings. Add links to encoders
and decoders for binary-to-binary codecs.
