.. bpo: 4346
.. date: 9373
.. nonce: UASH7u
.. release date: 2014-06-29
.. section: Core and Builtins

In PyObject_CallMethod and PyObject_CallMethodObjArgs, don't overwrite the
error set in PyObject_GetAttr.

..

.. bpo: 21831
.. date: 9372
.. nonce: LMoAu3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid integer overflow when large sizes and offsets are given to the buffer
type. CVE-2014-7185.

..

.. bpo: 19656
.. date: 9371
.. nonce: H_jvEi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Running Python with the -3 option now also warns about non-ascii bytes
literals.

..

.. bpo: 21642
.. date: 9370
.. nonce: CjIqaU
.. section: Core and Builtins

If the conditional if-else expression, allow an integer written with no
space between itself and the ``else`` keyword (e.g. ``True if 42else
False``) to be valid syntax.

..

.. bpo: 21523
.. date: 9369
.. nonce: f_PPYO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix over-pessimistic computation of the stack effect of some opcodes in the
compiler.  This also fixes a quadratic compilation time issue noticeable
when compiling code with a large number of "and" and "or" operators.

..

.. bpo: 21652
.. date: 9368
.. nonce: kCNkbE
.. section: Library

Prevent mimetypes.type_map from containing unicode keys on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 21729
.. date: 9367
.. nonce: oa2kD6
.. section: Library

Used the "with" statement in the dbm.dumb module to ensure files closing.

..

.. bpo: 21672
.. date: 9366
.. nonce: iMRNWM
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of ntpath.join on UNC-style paths.

..

.. bpo: 19145
.. date: 9365
.. nonce: cRrKpW
.. section: Library

The times argument for itertools.repeat now handles negative values the same
way for keyword arguments as it does for positional arguments.

..

.. bpo: 21832
.. date: 9364
.. nonce: PBA0Uu
.. section: Library

Require named tuple inputs to be exact strings.

..

.. bpo: 8343
.. date: 9363
.. nonce: 2KNnCH
.. section: Library

Named group error messages in the re module did not show the name of the
erroneous group.

..

.. bpo: 21491
.. date: 9362
.. nonce: suNKZf
.. section: Library

SocketServer: Fix a race condition in child processes reaping.

..

.. bpo: 21635
.. date: 9361
.. nonce: ET3OJZ
.. section: Library

The difflib SequenceMatcher.get_matching_blocks() method cache didn't match
the actual result.  The former was a list of tuples and the latter was a
list of named tuples.

..

.. bpo: 21722
.. date: 9360
.. nonce: WTHuRy
.. section: Library

The distutils "upload" command now exits with a non-zero return code when
uploading fails.  Patch by Martin Dengler.

..

.. bpo: 21766
.. date: 9359
.. nonce: 0xk_xC
.. section: Library

Prevent a security hole in CGIHTTPServer by URL unquoting paths before
checking for a CGI script at that path.

..

.. bpo: 21310
.. date: 9358
.. nonce: 2mjByJ
.. section: Library

Fixed possible resource leak in failed open().

..

.. bpo: 21304
.. date: 9357
.. nonce: xXyySz
.. section: Library

Backport the key derivation function hashlib.pbkdf2_hmac from Python 3 per
PEP 466.

..

.. bpo: 11709
.. date: 9356
.. nonce: JdObvL
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc.help function to not fail when sys.stdin is not a valid file.

..

.. bpo: 13223
.. date: 9355
.. nonce: 9AzEbN
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.writedoc so that the HTML documentation for methods that use
'self' in the example code is generated correctly.

..

.. bpo: 21552
.. date: 9354
.. nonce: uVy4tM
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow of too long string lengths in the tkinter
module on 64-bit platforms.

..

.. bpo: 14315
.. date: 9353
.. nonce: YzZzS8
.. section: Library

The zipfile module now ignores extra fields in the central directory that
are too short to be parsed instead of letting a struct.unpack error bubble
up as this "bad data" appears in many real world zip files in the wild and
is ignored by other zip tools.

..

.. bpo: 21402
.. date: 9352
.. nonce: GuVy1L
.. section: Library

Tkinter.ttk now works when default root window is not set.

..

.. bpo: 10203
.. date: 9351
.. nonce: gERvVk
.. section: Library

sqlite3.Row now truly supports sequence protocol.  In particulr it supports
reverse() and negative indices.  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 8743
.. date: 9350
.. nonce: I6_2r3
.. section: Library

Fix interoperability between set objects and the collections.Set() abstract
base class.

..

.. bpo: 21481
.. date: 9349
.. nonce: YDrlf7
.. section: Library

Argparse equality and inequality tests now return NotImplemented when
comparing to an unknown type.

..

.. bpo: 21940
.. date: 9348
.. nonce: VlIRz7
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for WidgetRedirector. Initial patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18592
.. date: 9347
.. nonce: sMG-SZ
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for SearchDialogBase. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 21694
.. date: 9346
.. nonce: 1oLmRo
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for ParenMatch. Patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 21686
.. date: 9345
.. nonce: TAkFB0
.. section: IDLE

add unittest for HyperParser. Original patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 12387
.. date: 9344
.. nonce: XO7Ozk
.. section: IDLE

Add missing upper(lower)case versions of default Windows key bindings for
Idle so Caps Lock does not disable them. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 21695
.. date: 9343
.. nonce: g-t0Tm
.. section: IDLE

Closing a Find-in-files output window while the search is still in progress
no longer closes Idle.

..

.. bpo: 18910
.. date: 9342
.. nonce: ke8lMK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for textView. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18292
.. date: 9341
.. nonce: ks_3wm
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoExpand. Patch by Saihadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18409
.. date: 9340
.. nonce: 7fe-aK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoComplete. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 20155
.. date: 9339
.. nonce: nphzS3
.. section: Tests

Changed HTTP method names in failing tests in test_httpservers so that
packet filtering software (specifically Windows Base Filtering Engine) does
not interfere with the transaction semantics expected by the tests.

..

.. bpo: 19493
.. date: 9338
.. nonce: SwbzLQ
.. section: Tests

Refactored the ctypes test package to skip tests explicitly rather than
silently.

..

.. bpo: 18492
.. date: 9337
.. nonce: ylPRU7
.. section: Tests

All resources are now allowed when tests are not run by regrtest.py.

..

.. bpo: 21605
.. date: 9336
.. nonce: qsLV8d
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tkinter images.

..

.. bpo: 21493
.. date: 9335
.. nonce: NqhRsy
.. section: Tests

Added test for ntpath.expanduser().  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19925
.. date: 9334
.. nonce: dhMx08
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the spwd module. Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 13355
.. date: 9333
.. nonce: gCByXK
.. section: Tests

random.triangular() no longer fails with a ZeroDivisionError when low equals
high.

..

.. bpo: 21522
.. date: 9332
.. nonce: b-VwFW
.. section: Tests

Added Tkinter tests for Listbox.itemconfigure(),
PanedWindow.paneconfigure(), and Menu.entryconfigure().

..

.. bpo: 20635
.. date: 9331
.. nonce: mzWmoS
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tk geometry managers.

..

.. bpo: 21811
.. date: 9330
.. nonce: 3_Xyr-
.. section: Build

Anticipated fixes to support OS X versions > 10.9.

..

.. bpo: 21671
.. date: 9329
.. nonce: sm-hhO
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1h. (See also:
CVE-2014-0224)
