.. bpo: 23971
.. date: 9588
.. nonce: fQZtJr
.. release date: 2015-05-10
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix underestimated presizing in dict.fromkeys().

..

.. bpo: 23757
.. date: 9587
.. nonce: Q9kwY_
.. section: Core and Builtins

PySequence_Tuple() incorrectly called the concrete list API when the data
was a list subclass.

..

.. bpo: 23629
.. date: 9586
.. nonce: r9Mt2C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the default __sizeof__ implementation for variable-sized objects.

..

.. bpo: 23055
.. date: 9585
.. nonce: rRkRIJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a buffer overflow in PyUnicode_FromFormatV.  Analysis and fix by Guido
Vranken.

..

.. bpo: 23048
.. date: 9584
.. nonce: X5BUd3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix jumping out of an infinite while loop in the pdb.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9583
.. nonce: fgX8Qe
.. section: Library

The keywords attribute of functools.partial is now always a dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 20274
.. date: 9582
.. nonce: uVHogg
.. section: Library

When calling a _sqlite.Connection, it now complains if passed any keyword
arguments.  Previously it silently ignored them.

..

.. bpo: 20274
.. date: 9581
.. nonce: hBst4M
.. section: Library

Remove ignored and erroneous "kwargs" parameters from three METH_VARARGS
methods on _sqlite.Connection.

..

.. bpo: 24134
.. date: 9580
.. nonce: TT0kHE
.. section: Library

assertRaises() and assertRaisesRegexp() checks are not longer successful if
the callable is None.

..

.. bpo: 23008
.. date: 9579
.. nonce: OZFCd-
.. section: Library

Fixed resolving attributes with boolean value is False in pydoc.

..

.. bpo: 24099
.. date: 9578
.. nonce: 2uAHX7
.. section: Library

Fix use-after-free bug in heapq's siftup and siftdown functions. (See also:
bpo-24100, bpo-24101)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9577
.. nonce: OuI94b
.. section: Library

Backport collections.deque fixes from Python 3.5.  Prevents reentrant
badness during deletion by deferring the decref until the container has been
restored to a consistent state.

..

.. bpo: 23842
.. date: 9576
.. nonce: 8UD2q_
.. section: Library

os.major(), os.minor() and os.makedev() now support ints again.

..

.. bpo: 23811
.. date: 9575
.. nonce: B6tzf9
.. section: Library

Add missing newline to the PyCompileError error message. Patch by Alex
Shkop.

..

.. bpo: 17898
.. date: 9574
.. nonce: EsbCnX
.. section: Library

Fix exception in gettext.py when parsing certain plural forms.

..

.. bpo: 23865
.. date: 9573
.. nonce: PtSLgU
.. section: Library

close() methods in multiple modules now are idempotent and more robust at
shutdown. If they need to release multiple resources, all are released even
if errors occur.

..

.. bpo: 23881
.. date: 9572
.. nonce: CYmvWv
.. section: Library

urllib.ftpwrapper constructor now closes the socket if the FTP connection
failed.

..

.. bpo: 15133
.. date: 9571
.. nonce: iHpkhw
.. section: Library

_tkinter.tkapp.getboolean() now supports long and Tcl_Obj and always returns
bool.  tkinter.BooleanVar now validates input values (accepted bool, int,
long, str, unicode, and Tcl_Obj).  tkinter.BooleanVar.get() now always
returns bool.

..

.. bpo: 23338
.. date: 9570
.. nonce: ZYMGN1
.. section: Library

Fixed formatting ctypes error messages on Cygwin. Patch by Makoto Kato.

..

.. bpo: 16840
.. date: 9569
.. nonce: kKIhPm
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports 64-bit integers added in Tcl 8.4 and arbitrary
precision integers added in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23834
.. date: 9568
.. nonce: 1w5YIz
.. section: Library

Fix socket.sendto(), use the C long type to store the result of sendto()
instead of the C int type.

..

.. bpo: 21526
.. date: 9567
.. nonce: QQEXrR
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports new boolean type in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23838
.. date: 9566
.. nonce: IX6FPX
.. section: Library

linecache now clears the cache and returns an empty result on MemoryError.

..

.. bpo: 23742
.. date: 9565
.. nonce: _EkAIa
.. section: Library

ntpath.expandvars() no longer loses unbalanced single quotes.

..

.. bpo: 21802
.. date: 9564
.. nonce: ygSM2A
.. section: Library

The reader in BufferedRWPair now is closed even when closing writer failed
in BufferedRWPair.close().

..

.. bpo: 23671
.. date: 9563
.. nonce: zWPm-a
.. section: Library

string.Template now allows specifying the "self" parameter as a keyword
argument.  string.Formatter now allows specifying the "self" and the
"format_string" parameters as keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 21560
.. date: 9562
.. nonce: lqfYv8
.. section: Library

An attempt to write a data of wrong type no longer cause GzipFile
corruption.  Original patch by Wolfgang Maier.

..

.. bpo: 23647
.. date: 9561
.. nonce: pX2qrx
.. section: Library

Increase impalib's MAXLINE to accommodate modern mailbox sizes.

..

.. bpo: 23539
.. date: 9560
.. nonce: 5BVUim
.. section: Library

If body is None, http.client.HTTPConnection.request now sets Content-Length
to 0 for PUT, POST, and PATCH headers to avoid 411 errors from some web
servers.

..

.. bpo: 23136
.. date: 9559
.. nonce: 1bnpnb
.. section: Library

_strptime now uniformly handles all days in week 0, including Dec 30 of
previous year.  Based on patch by Jim Carroll.

..

.. bpo: 23138
.. date: 9558
.. nonce: 4vMoMZ
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing cookies with absent keys or values in cookiejar. Patch by
Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23051
.. date: 9557
.. nonce: Vi5tCZ
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.Pool methods imap() and imap_unordered() now handle
exceptions raised by an iterator.  Patch by Alon Diamant and Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 22928
.. date: 9556
.. nonce: 1bJJIG
.. section: Library

Disabled HTTP header injections in httplib. Original patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23615
.. date: 9555
.. nonce: SRSoav
.. section: Library

Module tarfile is now can be reloaded with imp.reload().

..

.. bpo: 22853
.. date: 9554
.. nonce: LUBedC
.. section: Library

Fixed a deadlock when use multiprocessing.Queue at import time. Patch by
Florian Finkernagel and Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 23476
.. date: 9553
.. nonce: 82QV9I
.. section: Library

In the ssl module, enable OpenSSL's X509_V_FLAG_TRUSTED_FIRST flag on
certificate stores when it is available.

..

.. bpo: 23576
.. date: 9552
.. nonce: 98F-PP
.. section: Library

Avoid stalling in SSL reads when EOF has been reached in the SSL layer but
the underlying connection hasn't been closed.

..

.. bpo: 23504
.. date: 9551
.. nonce: o31h5I
.. section: Library

Added an __all__ to the types module.

..

.. bpo: 23458
.. date: 9550
.. nonce: QGBFRr
.. section: Library

On POSIX, the file descriptor kept open by os.urandom() is now set to non
inheritable

..

.. bpo: 22113
.. date: 9549
.. nonce: L5Fo5c
.. section: Library

struct.pack_into() now supports new buffer protocol (in particular accepts
writable memoryview).

..

.. bpo: 814253
.. date: 9548
.. nonce: AJWDsY
.. section: Library

Warnings now are raised when group references and conditional group
references are used in lookbehind assertions in regular expressions. (See
also: bpo-9179)

..

.. bpo: 23215
.. date: 9547
.. nonce: VHVSVX
.. section: Library

Multibyte codecs with custom error handlers that ignores errors consumed too
much memory and raised SystemError or MemoryError. Original patch by Aleksi
Torhamo.

..

.. bpo: 5700
.. date: 9546
.. nonce: iA5yzL
.. section: Library

io.FileIO() called flush() after closing the file. flush() was not called in
close() if closefd=False.

..

.. bpo: 21548
.. date: 9545
.. nonce: Rr1l-c
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() and pydoc.apropos() on modules with empty docstrings.
Initial patch by Yuyang Guo.

..

.. bpo: 22885
.. date: 9544
.. nonce: c3937m
.. section: Library

Fixed arbitrary code execution vulnerability in the dumbdbm module.
Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 23481
.. date: 9543
.. nonce: ZWwliG
.. section: Library

Remove RC4 from the SSL module's default cipher list.

..

.. bpo: 21849
.. date: 9542
.. nonce: XUnTp8
.. section: Library

Fixed xmlrpclib serialization of non-ASCII unicode strings in the
multiprocessing module.

..

.. bpo: 21840
.. date: 9541
.. nonce: PrOwSC
.. section: Library

Fixed expanding unicode variables of form $var in posixpath.expandvars().
Fixed all os.path implementations on unicode-disabled builds.

..

.. bpo: 23367
.. date: 9540
.. nonce: kHnFiz
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflows in the unicodedata module.

..

.. bpo: 23363
.. date: 9539
.. nonce: -koaol
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.permutations.

..

.. bpo: 23364
.. date: 9538
.. nonce: 3yBV-6
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.product.

..

.. bpo: 23365
.. date: 9537
.. nonce: h5jLQ9
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in itertools.combinations_with_replacement.

..

.. bpo: 23366
.. date: 9536
.. nonce: tyAfm8
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in itertools.combinations.

..

.. bpo: 23191
.. date: 9535
.. nonce: 55Cwcb
.. section: Library

fnmatch functions that use caching are now threadsafe.

..

.. bpo: 18518
.. date: 9534
.. nonce: JXgicC
.. section: Library

timeit now rejects statements which can't be compiled outside a function or
a loop (e.g. "return" or "break").

..

.. bpo: 19996
.. date: 9533
.. nonce: FvMyH0
.. section: Library

Make :mod:`httplib` ignore headers with no name rather than assuming the
body has started.

..

.. bpo: 20188
.. date: 9532
.. nonce: xocY-2
.. section: Library

Support Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) in the ssl module.

..

.. bpo: 23248
.. date: 9531
.. nonce: FjcyCP
.. section: Library

Update ssl error codes from latest OpenSSL git master.

..

.. bpo: 23098
.. date: 9530
.. nonce: 7VwF3K
.. section: Library

64-bit dev_t is now supported in the os module.

..

.. bpo: 23063
.. date: 9529
.. nonce: 9-UJRs
.. section: Library

In the disutils' check command, fix parsing of reST with code or code-block
directives.

..

.. bpo: 21356
.. date: 9528
.. nonce: 8NY75J
.. section: Library

Make ssl.RAND_egd() optional to support LibreSSL. The availability of the
function is checked during the compilation. Patch written by Bernard Spil.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9527
.. nonce: SZRSxn
.. section: Library

Backport the context argument to ftplib.FTP_TLS.

..

.. bpo: 23111
.. date: 9526
.. nonce: A6CAZK
.. section: Library

Maximize compatibility in protocol versions of ftplib.FTP_TLS.

..

.. bpo: 23112
.. date: 9525
.. nonce: dZGf82
.. section: Library

Fix SimpleHTTPServer to correctly carry the query string and fragment when
it redirects to add a trailing slash.

..

.. bpo: 22585
.. date: 9524
.. nonce: F4BkNo
.. section: Library

On OpenBSD 5.6 and newer, os.urandom() now calls getentropy(), instead of
reading /dev/urandom, to get pseudo-random bytes.

..

.. bpo: 23093
.. date: 9523
.. nonce: cP7OqD
.. section: Library

In the io, module allow more operations to work on detached streams.

..

.. bpo: 23071
.. date: 9522
.. nonce: 3BSqF7
.. section: Library

Added missing names to codecs.__all__.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23016
.. date: 9521
.. nonce: wctkY3
.. section: Library

A warning no longer produces an AttributeError when sys.stderr is None.

..

.. bpo: 21032
.. date: 9520
.. nonce: wxT_41
.. section: Library

Fixed socket leak if HTTPConnection.getresponse() fails. Original patch by
Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22609
.. date: 9519
.. nonce: mmLoeb
.. section: Library

Constructors and update methods of mapping classes in the collections module
now accept the self keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 23006
.. date: 9518
.. nonce: 6-u4Mv
.. section: Documentation

Improve the documentation and indexing of dict.__missing__. Add an entry in
the language datamodel special methods section. Revise and index its
discussion in the stdtypes mapping/dict section. Backport the code example
from 3.4.

..

.. bpo: 21514
.. date: 9517
.. nonce: 1H16T6
.. section: Documentation

The documentation of the json module now refers to new JSON RFC 7159 instead
of obsoleted RFC 4627.

..

.. bpo: 23330
.. date: 9516
.. nonce: LTlKDp
.. section: Tools/Demos

h2py now supports arbitrary filenames in #include.

..

.. bpo: 6639
.. date: 9515
.. nonce: rmjUmG
.. section: Tools/Demos

Module-level turtle functions no longer raise TclError after closing the
window.

..

.. bpo: 22314
.. date: 9514
.. nonce: ws6xsH
.. section: Tools/Demos

pydoc now works when the LINES environment variable is set.

..

.. bpo: 18905
.. date: 9513
.. nonce: oKTvz5
.. section: Tools/Demos

"pydoc -p 0" now outputs actually used port.  Based on patch by Wieland
Hoffmann.

..

.. bpo: 23345
.. date: 9512
.. nonce: HIGBKx
.. section: Tools/Demos

Prevent test_ssl failures with large OpenSSL patch level values (like
0.9.8zc).

..

.. bpo: 23799
.. date: 9511
.. nonce: IZtmH_
.. section: Tests

Added test.test_support.start_threads() for running and cleaning up multiple
threads.

..

.. bpo: 22390
.. date: 9510
.. nonce: UPVFnq
.. section: Tests

test.regrtest now emits a warning if temporary files or directories are left
after running a test.

..

.. bpo: 23583
.. date: 9509
.. nonce: bY8AbM
.. section: Tests

Added tests for standard IO streams in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 23392
.. date: 9508
.. nonce: Pe7_WK
.. section: Tests

Added tests for marshal C API that works with FILE*.

..

.. bpo: 18982
.. date: 9507
.. nonce: TynSM6
.. section: Tests

Add tests for CLI of the calendar module.

..

.. bpo: 19949
.. date: 9506
.. nonce: yw7T54
.. section: Tests

The test_xpickle test now tests compatibility with installed Python 2.7 and
reports skipped tests.  Based on patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 11578
.. date: 9505
.. nonce: 1IaAXh
.. section: Tests

Backported test for the timeit module.

..

.. bpo: 22943
.. date: 9504
.. nonce: t0MW3A
.. section: Tests

bsddb tests are locale independend now.

..

.. bpo: 23583
.. date: 9503
.. nonce: ApIRL5
.. section: IDLE

Fixed writing unicode to standard output stream in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 20577
.. date: 9502
.. nonce: Y71IMj
.. section: IDLE

Configuration of the max line length for the FormatParagraph extension has
been moved from the General tab of the Idle preferences dialog to the
FormatParagraph tab of the Config Extensions dialog. Patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 9501
.. nonce: JfHAA4
.. section: IDLE

Update Idle doc chapter to match current Idle and add new information.

..

.. bpo: 23180
.. date: 9500
.. nonce: cE_89F
.. section: IDLE

Rename IDLE "Windows" menu item to "Window". Patch by Al Sweigart.

..

.. bpo: 15506
.. date: 9499
.. nonce: nh8KlR
.. section: Build

Use standard PKG_PROG_PKG_CONFIG autoconf macro in the configure script.

..

.. bpo: 23032
.. date: 9498
.. nonce: F8fiIl
.. section: Build

Fix installer build failures on OS X 10.4 Tiger by disabling assembly code
in the OpenSSL build.

..

.. bpo: 23686
.. date: 9497
.. nonce: QZBsvh
.. section: Build

Update OS X 10.5 installer and Windows builds to use OpenSSL 1.0.2a.

..

.. bpo: 23998
.. date: 9496
.. nonce: z7mlLW
.. section: C API

PyImport_ReInitLock() now checks for lock allocation error

..

.. bpo: 22079
.. date: 9495
.. nonce: zhs2qM
.. section: C API

PyType_Ready() now checks that statically allocated type has no dynamically
allocated bases.
