.. bpo: 13020
.. date: 8656
.. nonce: 7y51PJ
.. release date: 2012-02-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference leak when allocating a structsequence object fails.  Patch
by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 13703
.. date: 8655
.. nonce: 8FylqY
.. section: Core and Builtins

oCERT-2011-003: add -R command-line option and PYTHONHASHSEED environment
variable, to provide an opt-in way to protect against denial of service
attacks due to hash collisions within the dict and set types.  Patch by
David Malcolm, based on work by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 11235
.. date: 8654
.. nonce: 6wzkv-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix OverflowError when trying to import a source file whose modification
time doesn't fit in a 32-bit timestamp.

..

.. bpo: 11638
.. date: 8653
.. nonce: M-D70Z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Unicode strings in 'name' and 'version' no longer cause UnicodeDecodeErrors.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8652
.. nonce: 2J4kRL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the fix for issue #12149: it was incorrect, although it had the side
effect of appearing to resolve the issue.  Thanks to Mark Shannon for
noticing.

..

.. bpo: 13546
.. date: 8651
.. nonce: iNNZwK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed an overflow issue that could crash the intepreter when calling
sys.setrecursionlimit((1<<31)-1).

..

.. bpo: 13333
.. date: 8650
.. nonce: jkzjPN
.. section: Core and Builtins

The UTF-7 decoder now accepts lone surrogates (the encoder already accepts
them).

..

.. bpo: 10519
.. date: 8649
.. nonce: vnPUhZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid unnecessary recursive function calls in setobject.c.

..

.. bpo: 13268
.. date: 8648
.. nonce: 1add1A
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the assert statement when a tuple is passed as the message.

..

.. bpo: 13018
.. date: 8647
.. nonce: WRySxn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leaks in error paths in dictobject.c. Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 12604
.. date: 8646
.. nonce: dDegux
.. section: Core and Builtins

VTRACE macro expanded to no-op in _sre.c to avoid compiler warnings. Patch
by Josh Triplett and Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 7833
.. date: 8645
.. nonce: NcSnnJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extension modules built using distutils on Windows will no longer include a
"manifest" to prevent them failing at import time in some embedded
situations.

..

.. bpo: 13186
.. date: 8644
.. nonce: 8x-IKP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix __delitem__ on old-style instances when invoked through
PySequence_DelItem.

..

.. bpo: 13156
.. date: 8643
.. nonce: YQ_oHA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert the patch for issue #10517 (reset TLS upon fork()), which was only
relevant for the native pthread TLS implementation.

..

.. bpo: 7732
.. date: 8642
.. nonce: Su45lo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash on importing a module if a directory has the same name than a
Python module (e.g. "__init__.py"): don't close the file twice.

..

.. bpo: 12973
.. date: 8641
.. nonce: i36yPj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checks that invoked undefined behaviour in int.__pow__.  These
overflow checks were causing int.__pow__ to produce incorrect results with
recent versions of Clang, as a result of the compiler optimizing the check
away.  Also fix similar overflow checks in list_repeat (listobject.c) and
islice_next (itertoolsmodule.c).  These bugs caused test failures with
recent versions of Clang.

..

.. bpo: 12266
.. date: 8640
.. nonce: SifsgD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix str.capitalize() to correctly uppercase/lowercase titlecased and cased
non-letter characters.

..

.. bpo: 12610
.. date: 8639
.. nonce: ppRi5I
.. section: Core and Builtins

Verify that user generated AST has correct string and identifier types
before compiling. (See also: bpo-12609)

..

.. bpo: 11627
.. date: 8638
.. nonce: sfRw_E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when __new__ on an exception returns a non-exception class.

..

.. bpo: 12149
.. date: 8637
.. nonce: tp-PTF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update the method cache after a type's dictionnary gets cleared by the
garbage collector.  This fixes a segfault when an instance and its type get
caught in a reference cycle, and the instance's deallocator calls one of the
methods on the type (e.g. when subclassing IOBase).  Diagnosis and patch by
Davide Rizzo.

..

.. bpo: 12501
.. date: 8636
.. nonce: 25PdW1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove Py3k warning for callable. callable() is supported again in Python
3.2.

..

.. bpo: 9611
.. date: 8635
.. nonce: tQEmuh
.. section: Core and Builtins

FileIO.read(), FileIO.readinto(), FileIO.write() and os.write() clamp the
length to INT_MAX on Windows. (See also: bpo-9015)

..

.. bpo: 1195
.. date: 8634
.. nonce: Tp_J8Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

my_fgets() now always clears errors before calling fgets(). Fix the
following case: sys.stdin.read() stopped with CTRL+d (end of file),
raw_input() interrupted by CTRL+c.

..

.. bpo: 10860
.. date: 8633
.. nonce: _w3Kvl
.. section: Core and Builtins

httplib now correctly handles an empty port after port delimiter in URLs.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8632
.. nonce: dh7XT7
.. section: Core and Builtins

dict_proxy objects now display their contents rather than just the class
name.

..

.. bpo: 8033
.. date: 8631
.. nonce: vZ-AWU
.. section: Library

sqlite3: Fix 64-bit integer handling in user functions on 32-bit
architectures. Initial patch by Philippe Devalkeneer.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8630
.. nonce: Apd_xz
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle slashes in the start tag.

..

.. bpo: 14001
.. date: 8629
.. nonce: Za_h38
.. section: Library

CVE-2012-0845: xmlrpc: Fix an endless loop in SimpleXMLRPCServer upon
malformed POST request.

..

.. bpo: 2489
.. date: 8628
.. nonce: EENP1J
.. section: Library

pty.spawn could consume 100% cpu when it encountered an EOF.

..

.. bpo: 13014
.. date: 8627
.. nonce: bfZLHS
.. section: Library

Fix a possible reference leak in SSLSocket.getpeercert().

..

.. bpo: 13987
.. date: 8626
.. nonce: rZLDDo
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle EOFs in the middle of a construct and
malformed start tags.

..

.. bpo: 13015
.. date: 8625
.. nonce: bxws6S
.. section: Library

Fix a possible reference leak in defaultdict.__repr__. Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 13979
.. date: 8624
.. nonce: Q0ci2w
.. section: Library

A bug in ctypes.util.find_library that caused the wrong library name to be
returned has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 1326113
.. date: 8623
.. nonce: QvF-XL
.. section: Library

distutils' build_ext command --libraries option now correctly parses
multiple values separated by whitespace or commas.

..

.. bpo: 13993
.. date: 8622
.. nonce: 4g3z3P
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle broken end tags.

..

.. bpo: 13960
.. date: 8621
.. nonce: g0TjwZ
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle broken comments.

..

.. bpo: 9750
.. date: 8620
.. nonce: CsQyVM
.. section: Library

Fix sqlite3.Connection.iterdump on tables and fields with a name that is a
keyword or contains quotes. Patch by Marko Kohtala.

..

.. bpo: 13994
.. date: 8619
.. nonce: pnLrEB
.. section: Library

Earlier partial revert of Distutils enhancements in 2.7 has left two
versions of customize_compiler, the original in distutils.sysconfig and
another copy in distutils.ccompiler, with some parts of distutils calling
one and others using the other. Complete the revert back to only having one
in distutils.sysconfig as is the case in 3.x.

..

.. bpo: 13590
.. date: 8618
.. nonce: b6Qvrj
.. section: Library

On OS X 10.7 and 10.6 with Xcode 4.2, building Distutils-based packages with
C extension modules may fail because Apple has removed gcc-4.2, the version
used to build python.org 64-bit/32-bit Pythons.  If the user does not
explicitly override the default C compiler by setting the CC environment
variable, Distutils will now attempt to compile extension modules with clang
if gcc-4.2 is required but not found. Also as a convenience, if the user
does explicitly set CC, substitute its value as the default compiler in the
Distutils LDSHARED configuration variable for OS X. (Note, the python.org
32-bit-only Pythons use gcc-4.0 and the 10.4u SDK, neither of which are
available in Xcode 4.  This change does not attempt to override settings to
support their use with Xcode 4.)

..

.. bpo: 9021
.. date: 8617
.. nonce: A0WRsT
.. section: Library

Add an introduction to the copy module documentation.

..

.. bpo: 6005
.. date: 8616
.. nonce: cy8Z22
.. section: Library

Examples in the socket library documentation use sendall, where relevant,
instead send method.

..

.. bpo: 10811
.. date: 8615
.. nonce: m6b_ZC
.. section: Library

Fix recursive usage of cursors. Instead of crashing, raise a
ProgrammingError now.

..

.. bpo: 13676
.. date: 8614
.. nonce: IwPgKL
.. section: Library

Handle strings with embedded zeros correctly in sqlite3.

..

.. bpo: 13806
.. date: 8613
.. nonce: Y34Lg3
.. section: Library

The size check in audioop decompression functions was too strict and could
reject valid compressed data.  Patch by Oleg Plakhotnyuk.

..

.. bpo: 13885
.. date: 8612
.. nonce: fTNryk
.. section: Library

CVE-2011-3389: the _ssl module would always disable the CBC IV attack
countermeasure.

..

.. bpo: 6631
.. date: 8611
.. nonce: FyxhCp
.. section: Library

Disallow relative file paths in urllib urlopen methods.

..

.. bpo: 13781
.. date: 8610
.. nonce: xWnNcZ
.. section: Library

Prevent gzip.GzipFile from using the dummy filename provided by file objects
opened with os.fdopen().

..

.. bpo: 13589
.. date: 8609
.. nonce: sQsnEf
.. section: Library

Fix some serialization primitives in the aifc module. Patch by Oleg
Plakhotnyuk.

..

.. bpo: 13803
.. date: 8608
.. nonce: WnPIts
.. section: Library

Under Solaris, distutils doesn't include bitness in the directory name.

..

.. bpo: 13642
.. date: 8607
.. nonce: 8qUg-G
.. section: Library

Unquote before b64encoding user:password during Basic Authentication. Patch
contributed by Joonas Kuorilehto and Michele Orrù.

..

.. bpo: 13636
.. date: 8606
.. nonce: eWRf1t
.. section: Library

Weak ciphers are now disabled by default in the ssl module (except when
SSLv2 is explicitly asked for).

..

.. bpo: 12798
.. date: 8605
.. nonce: ggdsmY
.. section: Library

Updated the mimetypes documentation.

..

.. bpo: 13639
.. date: 8604
.. nonce: X0z3dn
.. section: Library

Accept unicode filenames in tarfile.open(mode="w|gz").

..

.. bpo: 1785
.. date: 8603
.. nonce: DKL5I8
.. section: Library

Fix inspect and pydoc with misbehaving descriptors.

..

.. bpo: 7502
.. date: 8602
.. nonce: lIMyju
.. section: Library

Fix equality comparison for DocTestCase instances.  Patch by Cédric Krier.

..

.. bpo: 11870
.. date: 8601
.. nonce: 85bAB9
.. section: Library

threading: Properly reinitialize threads internal locks and condition
variables to avoid deadlocks in child processes.

..

.. bpo: 8035
.. date: 8600
.. nonce: yzn_Oa
.. section: Library

urllib: Fix a bug where the client could remain stuck after a redirection or
an error.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8599
.. nonce: xZO873
.. section: Library

tarfile.py: Correctly detect bzip2 compressed streams with blocksizes other
than 900k.

..

.. bpo: 13573
.. date: 8598
.. nonce: 2oPaJa
.. section: Library

The csv.writer now uses the repr() for floats rather than str(). This allows
floats to round-trip without loss of precision.

..

.. bpo: 13439
.. date: 8597
.. nonce: H8wdOt
.. section: Library

Fix many errors in turtle docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 12856
.. date: 8596
.. nonce: 7eIfN8
.. section: Library

Ensure child processes do not inherit the parent's random seed for filename
generation in the tempfile module.  Patch by Brian Harring.

..

.. bpo: 13458
.. date: 8595
.. nonce: EHyzED
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in the ssl module when decoding a certificate with a
subjectAltName.  Patch by Robert Xiao.

..

.. bpo: 13415
.. date: 8594
.. nonce: Ap8joO
.. section: Library

os.unsetenv() doesn't ignore errors anymore.

..

.. bpo: 13322
.. date: 8593
.. nonce: Ect89q
.. section: Library

Fix BufferedWriter.write() to ensure that BlockingIOError is raised when the
wrapped raw file is non-blocking and the write would block. Previous code
assumed that the raw write() would raise BlockingIOError, but
RawIOBase.write() is defined to returned None when the call would block.
Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 13358
.. date: 8592
.. nonce: kPO1ja
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now calls handle_data only once for each CDATA.

..

.. bpo: 4147
.. date: 8591
.. nonce: wQbNcw
.. section: Library

minidom's toprettyxml no longer adds whitespace around a text node when it
is the only child of an element.  Initial patch by Dan Kenigsberg.

..

.. bpo: 1745761
.. date: 8590
.. nonce: zfO1ng
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now correctly handles non-valid attributes, including adjacent
and unquoted attributes. (See also: bpo-755670, bpo-13357, bpo-12629,
bpo-1200313)

..

.. bpo: 13373
.. date: 8589
.. nonce: 8wM3bP
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.Queue.get() could sometimes block indefinitely when called
with a timeout.  Patch by Arnaud Ysmal.

..

.. bpo: 3067
.. date: 8588
.. nonce: yjMIU9
.. section: Library

Enhance the documentation and docstring of locale.setlocale().

..

.. bpo: 13254
.. date: 8587
.. nonce: CKJxT0
.. section: Library

Fix Maildir initialization so that maildir contents are read correctly.

..

.. bpo: 13140
.. date: 8586
.. nonce: EguPSD
.. section: Library

Fix the daemon_threads attribute of ThreadingMixIn.

..

.. bpo: 2892
.. date: 8585
.. nonce: kugtRq
.. section: Library

preserve iterparse events in case of SyntaxError.

..

.. bpo: 670664
.. date: 8584
.. nonce: dPMzKt
.. section: Library

Fix HTMLParser to correctly handle the content of ``<script>...</script>``
and ``<style>...</style>``.

..

.. bpo: 10817
.. date: 8583
.. nonce: 2NZ4yV
.. section: Library

Fix urlretrieve function to raise ContentTooShortError even when reporthook
is None. Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 7334
.. date: 8582
.. nonce: HVmJ5I
.. section: Library

close source files on ElementTree.parse and iterparse.

..

.. bpo: 13232
.. date: 8581
.. nonce: WWF7QZ
.. section: Library

logging: Improved logging of exceptions in the presence of multiple
encodings.

..

.. bpo: 10332
.. date: 8580
.. nonce: E9qFmi
.. section: Library

multiprocessing: fix a race condition when a Pool is closed before all tasks
have completed.

..

.. bpo: 1548891
.. date: 8579
.. nonce: isTjAs
.. section: Library

The cStringIO.StringIO() constructor now encodes unicode arguments with the
system default encoding just like the write() method does, instead of
converting it to a raw buffer.  This also fixes handling of unicode input in
the shlex module (#6988, #1170).

..

.. bpo: 9168
.. date: 8578
.. nonce: eLGWkL
.. section: Library

now smtpd is able to bind privileged port.

..

.. bpo: 12529
.. date: 8577
.. nonce: TX2NNI
.. section: Library

fix cgi.parse_header issue on strings with double-quotes and semicolons
together. Patch by Ben Darnell and Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 6090
.. date: 8576
.. nonce: 8BVasJ
.. section: Library

zipfile raises a ValueError when a document with a timestamp earlier than
1980 is provided. Patch contributed by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 13194
.. date: 8575
.. nonce: b0HQpu
.. section: Library

zlib.compressobj().copy() and zlib.decompressobj().copy() are now available
on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 13114
.. date: 8574
.. nonce: qtS6EQ
.. section: Library

Fix the distutils commands check and register when the long description is a
Unicode string with non-ASCII characters.

..

.. bpo: 7367
.. date: 8573
.. nonce: 2xoC41
.. section: Library

Fix pkgutil.walk_paths to skip directories whose contents cannot be read.

..

.. bpo: 7425
.. date: 8572
.. nonce: e4gH2x
.. section: Library

Prevent pydoc -k failures due to module import errors. (Backport to 2.7 of
existing 3.x fix)

..

.. bpo: 13099
.. date: 8571
.. nonce: hhmbgp
.. section: Library

Fix sqlite3.Cursor.lastrowid under a Turkish locale. Reported and diagnosed
by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 7689
.. date: 8570
.. nonce: --iH31
.. section: Library

Allow pickling of dynamically created classes when their metaclass is
registered with copy_reg.  Patch by Nicolas M. Thiéry and Craig Citro.

..

.. bpo: 13058
.. date: 8569
.. nonce: KJ3kEA
.. section: Library

ossaudiodev: fix a file descriptor leak on error. Patch by Thomas Jarosch.

..

.. bpo: 12931
.. date: 8568
.. nonce: b6La4G
.. section: Library

xmlrpclib now encodes Unicode URI to ISO-8859-1, instead of failing with a
UnicodeDecodeError.

..

.. bpo: 8933
.. date: 8567
.. nonce: yiVHCJ
.. section: Library

distutils' PKG-INFO files will now correctly report Metadata-Version: 1.1
instead of 1.0 if a Classifier or Download-URL field is present.

..

.. bpo: 8286
.. date: 8566
.. nonce: 9gJAZN
.. section: Library

The distutils command sdist will print a warning message instead of crashing
when an invalid path is given in the manifest template.

..

.. bpo: 12841
.. date: 8565
.. nonce: VRTnfy
.. section: Library

tarfile unnecessarily checked the existence of numerical user and group ids
on extraction. If one of them did not exist the respective id of the current
user (i.e. root) was used for the file and ownership information was lost.

..

.. bpo: 10946
.. date: 8564
.. nonce: HYgRut
.. section: Library

The distutils commands bdist_dumb, bdist_wininst and bdist_msi now respect a
--skip-build option given to bdist.

..

.. bpo: 12287
.. date: 8563
.. nonce: _b1Hy3
.. section: Library

Fix a stack corruption in ossaudiodev module when the FD is greater than
FD_SETSIZE.

..

.. bpo: 12839
.. date: 8562
.. nonce: YFQywe
.. section: Library

Fix crash in zlib module due to version mismatch. Fix by Richard M. Tew.

..

.. bpo: 12786
.. date: 8561
.. nonce: Wv58St
.. section: Library

Set communication pipes used by subprocess.Popen CLOEXEC to avoid them being
inherited by other subprocesses.

..

.. bpo: 4106
.. date: 8560
.. nonce: CWHsfS
.. section: Library

Fix occasional exceptions printed out by multiprocessing on interpreter
shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 11657
.. date: 8559
.. nonce: K6NkKs
.. section: Library

Fix sending file descriptors over 255 over a multiprocessing Pipe.

..

.. bpo: 12213
.. date: 8558
.. nonce: nL3AJE
.. section: Library

Fix a buffering bug with interleaved reads and writes that could appear on
io.BufferedRandom streams.

..

.. bpo: 12326
.. date: 8557
.. nonce: oR88Sz
.. section: Library

sys.platform is now always 'linux2' on Linux, even if Python is compiled on
Linux 3.

..

.. bpo: 13007
.. date: 8556
.. nonce: 6OcUii
.. section: Library

whichdb should recognize gdbm 1.9 magic numbers.

..

.. bpo: 9173
.. date: 8555
.. nonce: 7CSZen
.. section: Library

Let shutil._make_archive work if the logger argument is None.

..

.. bpo: 12650
.. date: 8554
.. nonce: hY2GLb
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition where a subprocess.Popen could leak resources
(FD/zombie) when killed at the wrong time.

..

.. bpo: 12752
.. date: 8553
.. nonce: 3uiyON
.. section: Library

Fix regression which prevented locale.normalize() from accepting unicode
strings.

..

.. bpo: 12683
.. date: 8552
.. nonce: pySdFM
.. section: Library

urlparse updated to include svn as schemes that uses relative paths. (svn
from 1.5 onwards support relative path).

..

.. bpo: 11933
.. date: 8551
.. nonce: voGTke
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect mtime comparison in distutils.

..

.. bpo: 11104
.. date: 8550
.. nonce: EZRzAK
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of distutils' sdist command with manually-maintained
MANIFEST files. (See also: bpo-8688)

..

.. bpo: 8887
.. date: 8549
.. nonce: GV2FAG
.. section: Library

"pydoc somebuiltin.somemethod" (or help('somebuiltin.somemethod') in Python
code) now finds the doc of the method.

..

.. bpo: 12603
.. date: 8548
.. nonce: wO8DQ8
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() on files with non-negative st_mtime.

..

.. bpo: 12514
.. date: 8547
.. nonce: e1PR4a
.. section: Library

Use try/finally to assure the timeit module restores garbage collections
when it is done.

..

.. bpo: 12607
.. date: 8546
.. nonce: t5RWHt
.. section: Library

In subprocess, fix issue where if stdin, stdout or stderr is given as a low
fd, it gets overwritten.

..

.. bpo: 12102
.. date: 8545
.. nonce: VJSgGA
.. section: Library

Document that buffered files must be flushed before being used with mmap.
Patch by Steffen Daode Nurpmeso.

..

.. bpo: 12560
.. date: 8544
.. nonce: 9ydkW_
.. section: Library

Build libpython.so on OpenBSD. Patch by Stefan Sperling.

..

.. bpo: 1813
.. date: 8543
.. nonce: M1IkRm
.. section: Library

Fix codec lookup and setting/getting locales under Turkish locales.

..

.. bpo: 10883
.. date: 8542
.. nonce: _e0WlS
.. section: Library

Fix socket leaks in urllib when using FTP.

..

.. bpo: 12592
.. date: 8541
.. nonce: -EZrk3
.. section: Library

Make Python build on OpenBSD 5 (and future major releases).

..

.. bpo: 12372
.. date: 8540
.. nonce: 7QRSzO
.. section: Library

POSIX semaphores are broken on AIX: don't use them.

..

.. bpo: 12571
.. date: 8539
.. nonce: qrkjgh
.. section: Library

Add a plat-linux3 directory mirroring the plat-linux2 directory, so that
"import DLFCN" and other similar imports work on Linux 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 7484
.. date: 8538
.. nonce: 0bZoAH
.. section: Library

smtplib no longer puts <> around addresses in VRFY and EXPN commands; they
aren't required and in fact postfix doesn't support that form.

..

.. bpo: 11603
.. date: 8537
.. nonce: B016rQ
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when __str__ is rebound as __repr__.  Patch by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 12502
.. date: 8536
.. nonce: p8Kedr
.. section: Library

asyncore: fix polling loop with AF_UNIX sockets.

..

.. bpo: 4376
.. date: 8535
.. nonce: 6yUats
.. section: Library

ctypes now supports nested structures in an endian different than the parent
structure. Patch by Vlad Riscutia.

..

.. bpo: 12493
.. date: 8534
.. nonce: qaPq_Q
.. section: Library

subprocess: Popen.communicate() now also handles EINTR errors if the process
has only one pipe.

..

.. bpo: 12467
.. date: 8533
.. nonce: x0sMKt
.. section: Library

warnings: fix a race condition if a warning is emitted at shutdown, if
globals()['__file__'] is None.

..

.. bpo: 12352
.. date: 8532
.. nonce: Htm8Oe
.. section: Library

Fix a deadlock in multiprocessing.Heap when a block is freed by the garbage
collector while the Heap lock is held.

..

.. bpo: 9516
.. date: 8531
.. nonce: v8AhHk
.. section: Library

On Mac OS X, change Distutils to no longer globally attempt to check or set
the MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET environment variable for the interpreter
process.  This could cause failures in non-Distutils subprocesses and was
unreliable since tests or user programs could modify the interpreter
environment after Distutils set it.  Instead, have Distutils set the
deployment target only in the environment of each build subprocess.  It is
still possible to globally override the default by setting
MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET before launching the interpreter; its value must be
greater or equal to the default value, the value with which the interpreter
was built.

..

.. bpo: 11802
.. date: 8530
.. nonce: 6ktAp2
.. section: Library

The cache in filecmp now has a maximum size of 100 so that it won't grow
without bound.

..

.. bpo: 12404
.. date: 8529
.. nonce: bS5-Qf
.. section: Library

Remove C89 incompatible code from mmap module. Patch by Akira Kitada.

..

.. bpo: 11700
.. date: 8528
.. nonce: VpdGS5
.. section: Library

mailbox proxy object close methods can now be called multiple times without
error, and _ProxyFile now closes the wrapped file.

..

.. bpo: 12133
.. date: 8527
.. nonce: Ag9yty
.. section: Library

AbstractHTTPHandler.do_open() of urllib.request closes the HTTP connection
if its getresponse() method fails with a socket error. Patch written by Ezio
Melotti.

..

.. bpo: 9284
.. date: 8526
.. nonce: -NhBcF
.. section: Library

Allow inspect.findsource() to find the source of doctest functions.

..

.. bpo: 10694
.. date: 8525
.. nonce: JD6qXr
.. section: Library

zipfile now ignores garbage at the end of a zipfile.

..

.. bpo: 11583
.. date: 8524
.. nonce: Wu1xMh
.. section: Library

Speed up os.path.isdir on Windows by using GetFileAttributes instead of
os.stat.

..

.. bpo: 12080
.. date: 8523
.. nonce: oDmVxk
.. section: Library

Fix a performance issue in Decimal._power_exact that caused some corner-case
Decimal.__pow__ calls to take an unreasonably long time.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8522
.. nonce: aMnclC
.. section: Library

Named tuples now work correctly with vars().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8521
.. nonce: qdHiJw
.. section: Library

sys.setcheckinterval() now updates the current ticker count as well as
updating the check interval, so if the user decreases the check interval,
the ticker doesn't have to wind down to zero from the old starting point
before the new interval takes effect.  And if the user increases the
interval, it makes sure the new limit takes effect right away rather have an
early task switch before recognizing the new interval.

..

.. bpo: 12085
.. date: 8520
.. nonce: cu9-Sp
.. section: Library

Fix an attribute error in subprocess.Popen destructor if the constructor has
failed, e.g. because of an undeclared keyword argument. Patch written by
Oleg Oshmyan.

..

.. bpo: 9041
.. date: 8519
.. nonce: iLXuHK
.. section: Library

An issue in ctypes.c_longdouble, ctypes.c_double, and ctypes.c_float that
caused an incorrect exception to be returned in the case of overflow has
been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8518
.. nonce: zRuNTM
.. section: Library

bsddb module: Erratic behaviour of "DBEnv->rep_elect()" because a typo.
Possible crash.

..

.. bpo: 13774
.. date: 8517
.. nonce: -HkPbH
.. section: Library

json: Fix a SystemError when a bogus encoding is passed to json.loads().

..

.. bpo: 9975
.. date: 8516
.. nonce: 2SRKp5
.. section: Library

socket: Fix incorrect use of flowinfo and scope_id. Patch by Vilmos Nebehaj.

..

.. bpo: 13159
.. date: 8515
.. nonce: Zoj0wD
.. section: Library

FileIO, BZ2File, and the built-in file class now use a linear-time buffer
growth strategy instead of a quadratic one.

..

.. bpo: 13070
.. date: 8514
.. nonce: zcoYVY
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when a TextIOWrapper caught in a reference cycle would be
finalized after the reference to its underlying BufferedRWPair's writer got
cleared by the GC.

..

.. bpo: 12881
.. date: 8513
.. nonce: IpOO6j
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix segfault with large structure field names.

..

.. bpo: 13013
.. date: 8512
.. nonce: KLH96V
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix a reference leak in PyCArrayType_from_ctype. Thanks to Suman
Saha for finding the bug and providing a patch.

..

.. bpo: 13022
.. date: 8511
.. nonce: zeo8hs
.. section: Library

Fix: _multiprocessing.recvfd() doesn't check that file descriptor was
actually received.

..

.. bpo: 12483
.. date: 8510
.. nonce: IpGhKV
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix a crash when the destruction of a callback object triggers the
garbage collector.

..

.. bpo: 12950
.. date: 8509
.. nonce: Z7xl-R
.. section: Library

Fix passing file descriptors in multiprocessing, under OpenIndiana/Illumos.

..

.. bpo: 12764
.. date: 8508
.. nonce: YtBoIj
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in ctypes when the name of a Structure field is not a string.

..

.. bpo: 9651
.. date: 8507
.. nonce: INPcwf
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when ctypes.create_string_buffer(0) was passed to some functions
like file.write().

..

.. bpo: 10309
.. date: 8506
.. nonce: -z_Mxz
.. section: Library

Define _GNU_SOURCE so that mremap() gets the proper signature.  Without
this, architectures where sizeof void* != sizeof int are broken.  Patch
given by Hallvard B Furuseth.

..

.. bpo: 964437
.. date: 8505
.. nonce: buwNGK
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE help window non-modal. Patch by Guilherme Polo and Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 13933
.. date: 8504
.. nonce: 5CAw8l
.. section: IDLE

IDLE auto-complete did not work with some imported module, like hashlib.
(Patch by Roger Serwy)

..

.. bpo: 13506
.. date: 8503
.. nonce: ztXHhD
.. section: IDLE

Add '' to path for IDLE Shell when started and restarted with Restart Shell.
Original patches by Marco Scataglini and Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 4625
.. date: 8502
.. nonce: 2pS4tW
.. section: IDLE

If IDLE cannot write to its recent file or breakpoint files, display a
message popup and continue rather than crash. (original patch by Roger
Serwy)

..

.. bpo: 8793
.. date: 8501
.. nonce: 2eA1HO
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE crash when given strings with invalid hex escape sequences.

..

.. bpo: 13296
.. date: 8500
.. nonce: bMHIFe
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE to clear compile __future__ flags on shell restart. (Patch by Roger
Serwy)

..

.. bpo: 14409
.. date: 8499
.. nonce: 8SNyRR
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now properly executes commands in the Shell window when it cannot read
the normal config files on startup and has to use the built-in default key
bindings. There was previously a bug in one of the defaults.

..

.. bpo: 3573
.. date: 8498
.. nonce: yIQRtd
.. section: IDLE

IDLE hangs when passing invalid command line args (directory(ies) instead of
file(s)).

..

.. bpo: 6807
.. date: 8497
.. nonce: lfskSG
.. section: Build

Run msisupport.mak earlier.

..

.. bpo: 10580
.. date: 8496
.. nonce: GkwWHF
.. section: Build

Minor grammar change in Windows installer.

..

.. bpo: 12627
.. date: 8495
.. nonce: pVGmbv
.. section: Build

Implement PEP 394 for Python 2.7 ("python2").

..

.. bpo: 8746
.. date: 8494
.. nonce: z-aagT
.. section: Build

Correct faulty configure checks so that os.chflags() and os.lchflags() are
once again built on systems that support these functions (*BSD and OS X).
Also add new stat file flags for OS X (UF_HIDDEN and UF_COMPRESSED).

..

.. bpo: 14053
.. date: 8493
.. nonce: tR4DDC
.. section: Tools/Demos

patchcheck.py ("make patchcheck") now works with MQ patches. Patch by
Francisco Martín Brugué.

..

.. bpo: 13930
.. date: 8492
.. nonce: jUdfJ-
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 is now able to write its converted output files to another directory
tree as well as copying unchanged files and altering the file suffix.  See
its new -o, -W and --add-suffix options.  This makes it more useful in many
automated code translation workflows.

..

.. bpo: 10639
.. date: 8491
.. nonce: ZGu-0K
.. section: Tools/Demos

reindent.py no longer converts newlines and will raise an error if
attempting to convert a file with mixed newlines.

..

.. bpo: 13628
.. date: 8490
.. nonce: XznUD3
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb.py is now able to retrieve more frames in the Python traceback if
Python is optimized.

..

.. bpo: 15467
.. date: 8489
.. nonce: Ilkvjd
.. section: Tests

Move helpers for __sizeof__ tests into test_support. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 11689
.. date: 8488
.. nonce: n1UPYK
.. section: Tests

Fix a variable scoping error in an sqlite3 test. Initial patch by Torsten
Landschoff.

..

.. bpo: 10881
.. date: 8487
.. nonce: CG7Ecn
.. section: Tests

Fix test_site failures with OS X framework builds.

..

.. bpo: 13901
.. date: 8486
.. nonce: ICKGPH
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_distutils failures on OS X with --enable-shared.

..

.. bpo: 13304
.. date: 8485
.. nonce: jDDi97
.. section: Tests

Skip test case if user site-packages disabled (-s or PYTHONNOUSERSITE).
(Patch by Carl Meyer)

..

.. bpo: 13218
.. date: 8484
.. nonce: EZ3jnV
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl failures on Debian/Ubuntu.

..

.. bpo: 12821
.. date: 8483
.. nonce: fmA715
.. section: Tests

Fix test_fcntl failures on OpenBSD 5.

..

.. bpo: 12331
.. date: 8482
.. nonce: ZSPeJW
.. section: Tests

The test suite for lib2to3 can now run from an installed Python.

..

.. bpo: 12549
.. date: 8481
.. nonce: S4urNL
.. section: Tests

Correct test_platform to not fail when OS X returns 'x86_64' as the
processor type on some Mac systems.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8480
.. nonce: EofQqr
.. section: Tests

Skip network tests when getaddrinfo() returns EAI_AGAIN, meaning a temporary
failure in name resolution.

..

.. bpo: 11812
.. date: 8479
.. nonce: jeNaCB
.. section: Tests

Solve transient socket failure to connect to 'localhost' in
test_telnetlib.py.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8478
.. nonce: cUdl39
.. section: Tests

Solved a potential deadlock in test_telnetlib.py. Related to issue #11812.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8477
.. nonce: QtTimW
.. section: Tests

Avoid failing in test_robotparser when mueblesmoraleda.com is flaky and an
overzealous DNS service (e.g. OpenDNS) redirects to a placeholder Web site.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8476
.. nonce: Vvh-2P
.. section: Tests

Avoid failing in test_urllibnet.test_bad_address when some overzealous DNS
service (e.g. OpenDNS) resolves a non-existent domain name.  The test is now
skipped instead.

..

.. bpo: 8716
.. date: 8475
.. nonce: -qUe-z
.. section: Tests

Avoid crashes caused by Aqua Tk on OSX when attempting to run test_tk or
test_ttk_guionly under a username that is not currently logged in to the
console windowserver (as may be the case under buildbot or ssh).

..

.. bpo: 12141
.. date: 8474
.. nonce: -5YCgZ
.. section: Tests

Install a copy of template C module file so that test_build_ext of
test_distutils is no longer silently skipped when run outside of a build
directory.

..

.. bpo: 8746
.. date: 8473
.. nonce: I497O-
.. section: Tests

Add additional tests for os.chflags() and os.lchflags(). Patch by Garrett
Cooper.

..

.. bpo: 10736
.. date: 8472
.. nonce: 60t_7a
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ttk test_widgets failures with Cocoa Tk 8.5.9 on Mac OS X.  (Patch
by Ronald Oussoren)

..

.. bpo: 12057
.. date: 8471
.. nonce: 7QVG6T
.. section: Tests

Add tests for ISO 2022 codecs (iso2022_jp, iso2022_jp_2, iso2022_kr).

..

.. bpo: 13491
.. date: 8470
.. nonce: zMFNID
.. section: Documentation

Fix many errors in sqlite3 documentation. Initial patch for #13491 by
Johannes Vogel. (See also: bpo-13995)

..

.. bpo: 13402
.. date: 8469
.. nonce: VSNrG0
.. section: Documentation

Document absoluteness of sys.executable.

..

.. bpo: 13883
.. date: 8468
.. nonce: atFSNh
.. section: Documentation

PYTHONCASEOK also works on OS X, OS/2, and RiscOS.

..

.. bpo: 2134
.. date: 8467
.. nonce: lkdzru
.. section: Documentation

The tokenize documentation has been clarified to explain why all operator
and delimiter tokens are treated as token.OP tokens.

..

.. bpo: 13513
.. date: 8466
.. nonce: Z6l39q
.. section: Documentation

Fix io.IOBase documentation to correctly link to the io.IOBase.readline
method instead of the readline module.

..

.. bpo: 13237
.. date: 8465
.. nonce: EVVjZK
.. section: Documentation

Reorganise subprocess documentation to emphasise convenience functions and
the most commonly needed arguments to Popen.

..

.. bpo: 13141
.. date: 8464
.. nonce: rDLimI
.. section: Documentation

Demonstrate recommended style for SocketServer examples.
