.. bpo: 10211
.. date: 9006
.. nonce: JF6QJN
.. release date: 2013-03-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

Buffer objects expose the new buffer interface internally

..

.. bpo: 16445
.. date: 9005
.. nonce: EF19nl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed potential segmentation fault when deleting an exception message.

..

.. bpo: 17275
.. date: 9004
.. nonce: Aqerft
.. section: Core and Builtins

Corrected class name in init error messages of the C version of
BufferedWriter and BufferedRandom.

..

.. bpo: 7963
.. date: 9003
.. nonce: FWJtUT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed misleading error message that issued when object is called without
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 5308
.. date: 9002
.. nonce: s5uAbP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise ValueError when marshalling too large object (a sequence with size >=
2**31), instead of producing illegal marshal data.

..

.. bpo: 17043
.. date: 9001
.. nonce: 4OVhGk
.. section: Core and Builtins

The unicode-internal decoder no longer read past the end of input buffer.

..

.. bpo: 16979
.. date: 9000
.. nonce: jTR3Oe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error handling bugs in the unicode-escape-decode decoder.

..

.. bpo: 10156
.. date: 8999
.. nonce: iEZGhY
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the interpreter's initialization phase, unicode globals are now
initialized dynamically as needed.

..

.. bpo: 16975
.. date: 8998
.. nonce: H9EsG9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error handling bug in the escape-decode decoder.

..

.. bpo: 14850
.. date: 8997
.. nonce: EhU_If
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now a charmap decoder treats U+FFFE as "undefined mapping" in any mapping,
not only in a Unicode string.

..

.. bpo: 11461
.. date: 8996
.. nonce: xwn_Zw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the incremental UTF-16 decoder. Original patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 16367
.. date: 8995
.. nonce: lewlCg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix FileIO.readall() on Windows for files larger than 2 GB.

..

.. bpo: 15516
.. date: 8994
.. nonce: 5-JJO7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug in PyString_FromFormat where it failed to properly ignore errors
from a __int__() method.

..

.. bpo: 16839
.. date: 8993
.. nonce: aEw6ZB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segfault when calling unicode() on a classic class early in
interpreter initialization.

..

.. bpo: 16761
.. date: 8992
.. nonce: Z2d0Tr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Calling ``int()`` and ``long()`` with *base* argument only now raises
TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 16759
.. date: 8991
.. nonce: U0-CFS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support the full DWORD (unsigned long) range in Reg2Py when retrieving a
REG_DWORD value. This corrects functions like winreg.QueryValueEx that may
have been returning truncated values.

..

.. bpo: 14420
.. date: 8990
.. nonce: uknqaC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support the full DWORD (unsigned long) range in Py2Reg when passed a
REG_DWORD value. Fixes ValueError in winreg.SetValueEx when given a long.

..

.. bpo: 13863
.. date: 8989
.. nonce: jfoNlP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Work around buggy 'fstat' implementation on Windows / NTFS that lead to
incorrect timestamps (off by one hour) being stored in .pyc files on some
systems.

..

.. bpo: 16602
.. date: 8988
.. nonce: FjnLTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a weakref's target was part of a long deallocation chain, the object
could remain reachable through its weakref even though its refcount had
dropped to zero.

..

.. bpo: 9011
.. date: 8987
.. nonce: ENWTWf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix hacky AST code that modified the CST when compiling a negated numeric
literal.

..

.. bpo: 16306
.. date: 8986
.. nonce: H29SXn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix multiple error messages when unknown command line parameters where
passed to the interpreter.  Patch by Hieu Nguyen.

..

.. bpo: 15379
.. date: 8985
.. nonce: Ix2NTb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix passing of non-BMP characters as integers for the charmap decoder
(already working as unicode strings).  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16453
.. date: 8984
.. nonce: 0Zm9en
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix equality testing of dead weakref objects.

..

.. bpo: 9535
.. date: 8983
.. nonce: hkixPD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix pending signals that have been received but not yet handled by Python to
not persist after os.fork() in the child process.

..

.. bpo: 15001
.. date: 8982
.. nonce: oD3gtX
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix segfault on "del sys.modules['__main__']". Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 5057
.. date: 8981
.. nonce: 5HFeht
.. section: Core and Builtins

the peepholer no longer optimizes subscription on unicode literals (e.g.
u'foo'[0]) in order to produce compatible pyc files between narrow and wide
builds.

..

.. bpo: 8401
.. date: 8980
.. nonce: TslRZr
.. section: Core and Builtins

assigning an int to a bytearray slice (e.g. b[3:4] = 5) now raises an error.

..

.. bpo: 14700
.. date: 8979
.. nonce: 1hIs61
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix buggy overflow checks for large width and precision in string formatting
operations.

..

.. bpo: 16345
.. date: 8978
.. nonce: azvPpP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an infinite loop when ``fromkeys`` on a dict subclass received a
nonempty dict from the constructor.

..

.. bpo: 6074
.. date: 8977
.. nonce: CXlveH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure cached bytecode files can always be updated by the user that created
them, even when the source file is read-only.

..

.. bpo: 14783
.. date: 8976
.. nonce: Sk4dfh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve int() and long() docstrings and switch docstrings for unicode(),
slice(), range(), and xrange() to use multi-line signatures.

..

.. bpo: 16030
.. date: 8975
.. nonce: ljwmkM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow bug in computing the `repr` of an xrange object with large
start, step or length.

..

.. bpo: 16029
.. date: 8974
.. nonce: zGzl68
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow bug occurring when pickling xranges with large start, step or
length.

..

.. bpo: 16037
.. date: 8973
.. nonce: tA7cA2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Limit httplib's _read_status() function to work around broken HTTP servers
and reduce memory usage. It's actually a backport of a Python 3.2 fix.
Thanks to Adrien Kunysz.

..

.. bpo: 16588
.. date: 8972
.. nonce: YKgxOa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Silence unused-but-set warnings in Python/thread_pthread

..

.. bpo: 13992
.. date: 8971
.. nonce: Jasaf2
.. section: Core and Builtins

The trashcan mechanism is now thread-safe.  This eliminates sporadic crashes
in multi-thread programs when several long deallocator chains ran
concurrently and involved subclasses of built-in container types.

..

.. bpo: 15801
.. date: 8970
.. nonce: gpcQV3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure mappings passed to '%' formatting are actually subscriptable.

..

.. bpo: 15604
.. date: 8969
.. nonce: q1V3sc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update uses of PyObject_IsTrue() to check for and handle errors correctly.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14579
.. date: 8968
.. nonce: Bcg1J1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error handling bug in the utf-16 decoder.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15368
.. date: 8967
.. nonce: iAaiat
.. section: Core and Builtins

An issue that caused bytecode generation to be non-deterministic when using
randomized hashing (-R) has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 15897
.. date: 8966
.. nonce: GQpoBE
.. section: Core and Builtins

zipimport.c doesn't check return value of fseek(). Patch by Felipe Cruz.

..

.. bpo: 16369
.. date: 8965
.. nonce: GtRTux
.. section: Core and Builtins

Global PyTypeObjects not initialized with PyType_Ready(...).

..

.. bpo: 15033
.. date: 8964
.. nonce: gKl1Eg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the exit status bug when modules invoked using -m switch, return the
proper failure return value (1). Patch contributed by Jeff Knupp.

..

.. bpo: 12268
.. date: 8963
.. nonce: 6mnsQI
.. section: Core and Builtins

File readline, readlines and read() methods no longer lose data when an
underlying read system call is interrupted.  IOError is no longer raised due
to a read system call returning EINTR from within these methods.

..

.. bpo: 13512
.. date: 8962
.. nonce: KW8Du9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Create ~/.pypirc securely (CVE-2011-4944).  Initial patch by Philip Jenvey,
tested by Mageia and Debian.

..

.. bpo: 7719
.. date: 8961
.. nonce: O-kdp6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make distutils ignore ``.nfs*`` files instead of choking later on.  Initial
patch by SilentGhost and Jeff Ramnani.

..

.. bpo: 10053
.. date: 8960
.. nonce: rOxp0i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't close FDs when FileIO.__init__ fails. Loosely based on the work by
Hirokazu Yamamoto.

..

.. bpo: 14775
.. date: 8959
.. nonce: AHE3Lc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential quadratic dict build-up due to the garbage collector
repeatedly trying to untrack dicts.

..

.. bpo: 14494
.. date: 8958
.. nonce: OjJqfu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix __future__.py and its documentation to note that absolute imports are
the default behavior in 3.0 instead of 2.7. Patch by Sven Marnach.

..

.. bpo: 14761
.. date: 8957
.. nonce: A8TEE6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential leak on an error case in the import machinery.

..

.. bpo: 14699
.. date: 8956
.. nonce: AuoeMs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix calling the classmethod descriptor directly.

..

.. bpo: 11603
.. date: 8955
.. nonce: aGsFsn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Setting __repr__ to __str__ now raises a RuntimeError when repr() or str()
is called on such an object.

..

.. bpo: 14658
.. date: 8954
.. nonce: jeSkqL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix binding a special method to a builtin implementation of a special method
with a different name.

..

.. bpo: 14612
.. date: 8953
.. nonce: uTBlpg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix jumping around with blocks by setting f_lineno.

..

.. bpo: 13889
.. date: 8952
.. nonce: 5jUbDL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check and (if necessary) set FPU control word before calling any of the
dtoa.c string <-> float conversion functions, on MSVC builds of Python.
This fixes issues when embedding Python in a Delphi app.

..

.. bpo: 14505
.. date: 8951
.. nonce: oeGD4J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix file descriptor leak when deallocating file objects created with
PyFile_FromString().

..

.. bpo: 14474
.. date: 8950
.. nonce: 8TuKNN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Save and restore exception state in thread.start_new_thread() while writing
error message if the thread leaves an unhandled exception.

..

.. bpo: 13019
.. date: 8949
.. nonce: LYHgJO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential reference leaks in bytearray.extend().  Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 14378
.. date: 8948
.. nonce: SYESoz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix compiling ast.ImportFrom nodes with a "__future__" string as the module
name that was not interned.

..

.. bpo: 14331
.. date: 8947
.. nonce: xcTH6m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use significantly less stack space when importing modules by allocating path
buffers on the heap instead of the stack.

..

.. bpo: 14334
.. date: 8946
.. nonce: l8YQhg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent in a segfault in type.__getattribute__ when it was not passed
strings. Also fix segfaults in the __getattribute__ and __setattr__ methods
of old-style classes.

..

.. bpo: 14161
.. date: 8945
.. nonce: VorA5N
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix the __repr__ of file objects to escape the file name.

..

.. bpo: 1469629
.. date: 8944
.. nonce: ej86Z-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow cycles through an object's __dict__ slot to be collected. (For example
if ``x.__dict__ is x``).

..

.. bpo: 13521
.. date: 8943
.. nonce: L_inbK
.. section: Core and Builtins

dict.setdefault() now does only one lookup for the given key, making it
"atomic" for many purposes.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński.

..

.. bpo: 1602133
.. date: 8942
.. nonce: lYqpUo
.. section: Core and Builtins

on Mac OS X a shared library build (``--enable-shared``) now fills the
``os.environ`` variable correctly.

..

.. bpo: 10538
.. date: 8941
.. nonce: F7Gerr
.. section: Core and Builtins

When using the "s*" code with PyArg_ParseTuple() to fill a Py_buffer
structure with data from an object supporting only the old PyBuffer
interface, a reference to the source objects is now properly added to the
Py_buffer.obj member.

..

.. bpo: 12718
.. date: 8940
.. nonce: lrGueo
.. section: Library

Fix interaction with winpdb overriding __import__ by setting importer
attribute on BaseConfigurator instance.

..

.. bpo: 17521
.. date: 8939
.. nonce: rDGKe7
.. section: Library

Corrected non-enabling of logger following two calls to fileConfig().

..

.. bpo: 17508
.. date: 8938
.. nonce: sO6qmY
.. section: Library

Corrected MemoryHandler configuration in dictConfig() where the target
handler wasn't configured first.

..

.. bpo: 10212
.. date: 8937
.. nonce: XGXAQQ
.. section: Library

cStringIO and struct.unpack support new buffer objects.

..

.. bpo: 12098
.. date: 8936
.. nonce: kcQpDY
.. section: Library

multiprocessing on Windows now starts child processes using the same
sys.flags as the current process.  Initial patch by Sergey Mezentsev.

..

.. bpo: 8862
.. date: 8935
.. nonce: WpBti_
.. section: Library

Fixed curses cleanup when getkey is interrupted by a signal.

..

.. bpo: 9090
.. date: 8934
.. nonce: FUyySi
.. section: Library

When a socket with a timeout fails with EWOULDBLOCK or EAGAIN, retry the
select() loop instead of bailing out.  This is because select() can
incorrectly report a socket as ready for reading (for example, if it
received some data with an invalid checksum).

..

.. bpo: 1285086
.. date: 8933
.. nonce: U7ONBL
.. section: Library

Get rid of the refcounting hack and speed up urllib.unquote().

..

.. bpo: 17368
.. date: 8932
.. nonce: y8QiJd
.. section: Library

Fix an off-by-one error in the Python JSON decoder that caused a failure
while decoding empty object literals when object_pairs_hook was specified.

..

.. bpo: 17278
.. date: 8931
.. nonce: pOF4An
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in heapq.heappush() and heapq.heappop() when the list is being
resized concurrently.

..

.. bpo: 17018
.. date: 8930
.. nonce: l8_sa8
.. section: Library

Make Process.join() retry if os.waitpid() fails with EINTR.

..

.. bpo: 14720
.. date: 8929
.. nonce: rjT0OJ
.. section: Library

sqlite3: Convert datetime microseconds correctly. Patch by Lowe Thiderman.

..

.. bpo: 17225
.. date: 8928
.. nonce: Z396fN
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now counts columns in the first line starting with 1, as in
other lines.

..

.. bpo: 7842
.. date: 8927
.. nonce: p2kMAC
.. section: Library

backported fix for py_compile.compile() syntax error handling.

..

.. bpo: 13153
.. date: 8926
.. nonce: IN7Ddm
.. section: Library

Tkinter functions now raise TclError instead of ValueError when a unicode
argument contains non-BMP character.

..

.. bpo: 9669
.. date: 8925
.. nonce: Td9alB
.. section: Library

Protect re against infinite loops on zero-width matching in non-greedy
repeat.  Patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 13169
.. date: 8924
.. nonce: txDMgH
.. section: Library

The maximal repetition number in a regular expression has been increased
from 65534 to 2147483647 (on 32-bit platform) or 4294967294 (on 64-bit).

..

.. bpo: 16743
.. date: 8923
.. nonce: 7vwfDN
.. section: Library

Fix mmap overflow check on 32 bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 11311
.. date: 8922
.. nonce: NvgObQ
.. section: Library

StringIO.readline(0) now returns an empty string as all other file-like
objects.

..

.. bpo: 16800
.. date: 8921
.. nonce: HxSo58
.. section: Library

tempfile.gettempdir() no longer left temporary files when the disk is full.
Original patch by Amir Szekely.

..

.. bpo: 13555
.. date: 8920
.. nonce: bXG1a4
.. section: Library

cPickle now supports files larger than 2 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 17052
.. date: 8919
.. nonce: TEWdzQ
.. section: Library

unittest discovery should use self.testLoader.

..

.. bpo: 4591
.. date: 8918
.. nonce: 9wJlD8
.. section: Library

Uid and gid values larger than 2**31 are supported now.

..

.. bpo: 17141
.. date: 8917
.. nonce: pXFICp
.. section: Library

random.vonmisesvariate() no more hangs for large kappas.

..

.. bpo: 17149
.. date: 8916
.. nonce: ONtJnJ
.. section: Library

Fix random.vonmisesvariate to always return results in the range [0,
2*math.pi].

..

.. bpo: 1470548
.. date: 8915
.. nonce: xr_CsJ
.. section: Library

XMLGenerator now works with UTF-16 and UTF-32 encodings.

..

.. bpo: 6975
.. date: 8914
.. nonce: 4GoPXW
.. section: Library

os.path.realpath() now correctly resolves multiple nested symlinks on POSIX
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 7358
.. date: 8913
.. nonce: -jPlTz
.. section: Library

cStringIO.StringIO now supports writing to and reading from a stream larger
than 2 GiB on 64-bit systems.

..

.. bpo: 10355
.. date: 8912
.. nonce: lkhqo9
.. section: Library

In SpooledTemporaryFile class mode and name properties and xreadlines method
now work for unrolled files.  encoding and newlines properties now removed
as they have no sense and always produced AttributeError.

..

.. bpo: 16686
.. date: 8911
.. nonce: zT_bpe
.. section: Library

Fixed a lot of bugs in audioop module.  Fixed crashes in avgpp(), maxpp()
and ratecv().  Fixed an integer overflow in add(), bias(), and ratecv().
reverse(), lin2lin() and ratecv() no more lose precision for 32-bit samples.
max() and rms() no more returns a negative result and various other
functions now work correctly with 32-bit sample -0x80000000.

..

.. bpo: 17073
.. date: 8910
.. nonce: wlCar1
.. section: Library

Fix some integer overflows in sqlite3 module.

..

.. bpo: 6083
.. date: 8909
.. nonce: MVAIwI
.. section: Library

Fix multiple segmentation faults occurred when PyArg_ParseTuple parses
nested mutating sequence.

..

.. bpo: 5289
.. date: 8908
.. nonce: 4azz2m
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes.util.find_library on Solaris.

..

.. bpo: 17106
.. date: 8907
.. nonce: -2_cbV
.. section: Library

Fix a segmentation fault in io.TextIOWrapper when an underlying stream or a
decoder produces data of an unexpected type (i.e. when io.TextIOWrapper
initialized with text stream or use bytes-to-bytes codec).

..

.. bpo: 13994
.. date: 8906
.. nonce: Y89GZB
.. section: Library

Add compatibility alias in distutils.ccompiler for
distutils.sysconfig.customize_compiler.

..

.. bpo: 15633
.. date: 8905
.. nonce: t407yZ
.. section: Library

httplib.HTTPResponse is now mark closed when the server sends less than the
advertised Content-Length.

..

.. bpo: 15881
.. date: 8904
.. nonce: UfzKmP
.. section: Library

Fixed atexit hook in multiprocessing.

..

.. bpo: 14340
.. date: 8903
.. nonce: 6XMfoZ
.. section: Library

Upgrade the embedded expat library to version 2.1.0.

..

.. bpo: 11159
.. date: 8902
.. nonce: P-3Mf3
.. section: Library

SAX parser now supports unicode file names.

..

.. bpo: 6972
.. date: 8901
.. nonce: e2Lq4T
.. section: Library

The zipfile module no longer overwrites files outside of its destination
path when extracting malicious zip files.

..

.. bpo: 17049
.. date: 8900
.. nonce: CoOx8W
.. section: Library

Localized calendar methods now return unicode if a locale includes an
encoding and the result string contains month or weekday (was regression
from Python 2.6).

..

.. bpo: 4844
.. date: 8899
.. nonce: jvXWfL
.. section: Library

ZipFile now raises BadZipfile when opens a ZIP file with an incomplete "End
of Central Directory" record.  Original patch by Guilherme Polo and Alan
McIntyre.

..

.. bpo: 15505
.. date: 8898
.. nonce: -pH9Mh
.. section: Library

`unittest.installHandler` no longer assumes SIGINT handler is set to a
callable object.

..

.. bpo: 17051
.. date: 8897
.. nonce: erKg1U
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in os.path.isdir() on Windows. Patch by Robert Xiao.

..

.. bpo: 13454
.. date: 8896
.. nonce: 81rUI-
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when deleting an iterator created by itertools.tee() if all
other iterators were very advanced before.

..

.. bpo: 16992
.. date: 8895
.. nonce: s_RXIM
.. section: Library

On Windows in signal.set_wakeup_fd, validate the file descriptor argument.

..

.. bpo: 15861
.. date: 8894
.. nonce: gGkxCM
.. section: Library

tkinter now correctly works with lists and tuples containing strings with
whitespaces, backslashes or unbalanced braces.

..

.. bpo: 10527
.. date: 8893
.. nonce: EuNKip
.. section: Library

Use poll() instead of select() for multiprocessing pipes.

..

.. bpo: 9720
.. date: 8892
.. nonce: XPXDks
.. section: Library

zipfile now writes correct local headers for files larger than 4 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 13899
.. date: 8891
.. nonce: yz3hXA
.. section: Library

\A, \Z, and \B now correctly match the A, Z, and B literals when used inside
character classes (e.g. '[\A]').  Patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 16398
.. date: 8890
.. nonce: JU7cL4
.. section: Library

Optimize deque.rotate() so that it only moves pointers and doesn't touch the
underlying data with increfs and decrefs.

..

.. bpo: 15109
.. date: 8889
.. nonce: Qk6XVt
.. section: Library

Fix regression in sqlite3's iterdump method where it would die with an
encoding error if the database contained string values containing non-ASCII.
(Regression was introduced by fix for 9750).

..

.. bpo: 15545
.. date: 8888
.. nonce: FCBNNV
.. section: Library

Fix regression in sqlite3's iterdump method where it was failing if the
connection used a row factory (such as sqlite3.Row) that produced unsortable
objects. (Regression was introduced by fix for 9750).

..

.. bpo: 16828
.. date: 8887
.. nonce: KB886T
.. section: Library

Fix error incorrectly raised by bz2.compress(''). Patch by Martin Packman.

..

.. bpo: 9586
.. date: 8886
.. nonce: 9tuKgR
.. section: Library

Redefine SEM_FAILED on MacOSX to keep compiler happy.

..

.. bpo: 10527
.. date: 8885
.. nonce: 7btVvN
.. section: Library

make multiprocessing use poll() instead of select() if available.

..

.. bpo: 16485
.. date: 8884
.. nonce: aUJyTZ
.. section: Library

Now file descriptors are closed if file header patching failed on closing an
aifc file.

..

.. bpo: 12065
.. date: 8883
.. nonce: FBZpyD
.. section: Library

connect_ex() on an SSL socket now returns the original errno when the
socket's timeout expires (it used to return None).

..

.. bpo: 16713
.. date: 8882
.. nonce: YX5wyQ
.. section: Library

Fix the parsing of tel url with params using urlparse module.

..

.. bpo: 16443
.. date: 8881
.. nonce: SnGosi
.. section: Library

Add docstrings to regular expression match objects. Patch by Anton Kasyanov.

..

.. bpo: 8853
.. date: 8880
.. nonce: vSQPAG
.. section: Library

Allow port to be of type long for socket.getaddrinfo().

..

.. bpo: 16597
.. date: 8879
.. nonce: z8uMEN
.. section: Library

In buffered and text IO, call close() on the underlying stream if invoking
flush() fails.

..

.. bpo: 15701
.. date: 8878
.. nonce: rAh1Sy
.. section: Library

Fix HTTPError info method call to return the headers information.

..

.. bpo: 16646
.. date: 8877
.. nonce: Tc3vsq
.. section: Library

ftplib.FTP.makeport() might lose socket error details. (patch by Serhiy
Storchaka)

..

.. bpo: 16626
.. date: 8876
.. nonce: P9xKcu
.. section: Library

Fix infinite recursion in glob.glob() on Windows when the pattern contains a
wildcard in the drive or UNC path.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16298
.. date: 8875
.. nonce: kN3o52
.. section: Library

In HTTPResponse.read(), close the socket when there is no Content-Length and
the incoming stream is finished.  Patch by Eran Rundstein.

..

.. bpo: 16248
.. date: 8874
.. nonce: yOopnt
.. section: Library

Disable code execution from the user's home directory by tkinter when the -E
flag is passed to Python.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16628
.. date: 8873
.. nonce: qnWML3
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in ctypes.resize().

..

.. bpo: 13614
.. date: 8872
.. nonce: buqA2j
.. section: Library

Fix setup.py register failure with invalid rst in description. Patch by
Julien Courteau and Pierre Paul Lefebvre.

..

.. bpo: 10182
.. date: 8871
.. nonce: 0nH79H
.. section: Library

The re module doesn't truncate indices to 32 bits anymore. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16573
.. date: 8870
.. nonce: kKjx72
.. section: Library

In 2to3, treat enumerate() like a consuming call, so superfluous list()
calls aren't added to filter(), map(), and zip() which are directly passed
enumerate().

..

.. bpo: 1160
.. date: 8869
.. nonce: n79fOA
.. section: Library

Fix compiling large regular expressions on UCS2 builds. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14313
.. date: 8868
.. nonce: WpDB93
.. section: Library

zipfile now raises NotImplementedError when the compression type is unknown.

..

.. bpo: 16408
.. date: 8867
.. nonce: iqzks4
.. section: Library

Fix file descriptors not being closed in error conditions in the zipfile
module.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16327
.. date: 8866
.. nonce: uVAHv3
.. section: Library

The subprocess module no longer leaks file descriptors used for
stdin/stdout/stderr pipes to the child when fork() fails.

..

.. bpo: 14396
.. date: 8865
.. nonce: aUgPuV
.. section: Library

Handle the odd rare case of waitpid returning 0 when not expected in
subprocess.Popen.wait().

..

.. bpo: 16411
.. date: 8864
.. nonce: 9Mn07O
.. section: Library

Fix a bug where zlib.decompressobj().flush() might try to access
previously-freed memory. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16350
.. date: 8863
.. nonce: b77tF6
.. section: Library

zlib.decompressobj().decompress() now accumulates data from successive calls
after EOF in unused_data, instead of only saving the argument to the last
call. decompressobj().flush() now correctly sets unused_data and
unconsumed_tail. A bug in the handling of MemoryError when setting the
unconsumed_tail attribute has also been fixed. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 12759
.. date: 8862
.. nonce: c7p8aw
.. section: Library

sre_parse now raises a proper error when the name of the group is missing.
Initial patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16152
.. date: 8861
.. nonce: Lypvsp
.. section: Library

fix tokenize to ignore whitespace at the end of the code when no newline is
found.  Patch by Ned Batchelder.

..

.. bpo: 16230
.. date: 8860
.. nonce: Y7XU0-
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in select.select() when one of the lists changes size while
iterated on.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16228
.. date: 8859
.. nonce: zsna-8
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the json module where a list changes size while it is being
encoded.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14897
.. date: 8858
.. nonce: OGbALj
.. section: Library

Enhance error messages of struct.pack and struct.pack_into. Patch by Matti
Mäki.

..

.. bpo: 12890
.. date: 8857
.. nonce: kDaDxa
.. section: Library

cgitb no longer prints spurious <p> tags in text mode when the logdir option
is specified.

..

.. bpo: 14398
.. date: 8856
.. nonce: jPT4ME
.. section: Library

Fix size truncation and overflow bugs in the bz2 module.

..

.. bpo: 5148
.. date: 8855
.. nonce: VHoO2C
.. section: Library

Ignore 'U' in mode given to gzip.open() and gzip.GzipFile().

..

.. bpo: 16220
.. date: 8854
.. nonce: KAtvbg
.. section: Library

wsgiref now always calls close() on an iterable response. Patch by Brent
Tubbs.

..

.. bpo: 16461
.. date: 8853
.. nonce: 4XLB7L
.. section: Library

Wave library should be able to deal with 4GB wav files, and sample rate of
44100 Hz.

..

.. bpo: 16176
.. date: 8852
.. nonce: iZz-x5
.. section: Library

Properly identify Windows 8 via platform.platform()

..

.. bpo: 15756
.. date: 8851
.. nonce: cV4TEW
.. section: Library

subprocess.poll() now properly handles errno.ECHILD to return a returncode
of 0 when the child has already exited or cannot be waited on.

..

.. bpo: 12376
.. date: 8850
.. nonce: mkpQwv
.. section: Library

Pass on parameters in TextTestResult.__init__ super call

..

.. bpo: 15222
.. date: 8849
.. nonce: lOnn6t
.. section: Library

Insert blank line after each message in mbox mailboxes

..

.. bpo: 16013
.. date: 8848
.. nonce: lJImKp
.. section: Library

Fix CSV Reader parsing issue with ending quote characters. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15421
.. date: 8847
.. nonce: SUEEPv
.. section: Library

fix an OverflowError in Calendar.itermonthdates() after datetime.MAXYEAR.
Patch by Cédric Krier.

..

.. bpo: 15970
.. date: 8846
.. nonce: 8deo2K
.. section: Library

xml.etree.ElementTree now serializes correctly the empty HTML elements
'meta' and 'param'.

..

.. bpo: 15676
.. date: 8845
.. nonce: V_auQh
.. section: Library

Now "mmap" check for empty files before doing the offset check.  Patch by
Steven Willis.

..

.. bpo: 15340
.. date: 8844
.. nonce: Aqn0c1
.. section: Library

Fix importing the random module when /dev/urandom cannot be opened.  This
was a regression caused by the hash randomization patch.

..

.. bpo: 15841
.. date: 8843
.. nonce: M11nwa
.. section: Library

The readable(), writable() and seekable() methods of io.BytesIO and
io.StringIO objects now raise ValueError when the object has been closed.
Patch by Alessandro Moura.

..

.. bpo: 16112
.. date: 8842
.. nonce: 7UQthq
.. section: Library

platform.architecture does not correctly escape argument to /usr/bin/file.
Patch by David Benjamin.

..

.. bpo: 12776
.. date: 8841
.. nonce: MzM-xL
.. section: Library

call argparse type function (specified by add_argument) only once. Before,
the type function was called twice in the case where the default was
specified and the argument was given as well.  This was especially
problematic for the FileType type, as a default file would always be opened,
even if a file argument was specified on the command line. (See also:
bpo-11839)

..

.. bpo: 15906
.. date: 8840
.. nonce: sY-Tgu
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in argparse caused by the preceding change, when
action='append', type='str' and default=[].

..

.. bpo: 13370
.. date: 8839
.. nonce: E9RveK
.. section: Library

Ensure that ctypes works on Mac OS X when Python is compiled using the clang
compiler

..

.. bpo: 15544
.. date: 8838
.. nonce: 3QjWdU
.. section: Library

Fix Decimal.__float__ to work with payload-carrying NaNs.

..

.. bpo: 15199
.. date: 8837
.. nonce: iOOV1X
.. section: Library

Fix JavaScript's default MIME type to application/javascript. Patch by
Bohuslav Kabrda.

..

.. bpo: 15477
.. date: 8836
.. nonce: 9gGqPw
.. section: Library

In cmath and math modules, add workaround for platforms whose
system-supplied log1p function doesn't respect signs of zeros.

..

.. bpo: 11062
.. date: 8835
.. nonce: ZhTF21
.. section: Library

Fix adding a message from file to Babyl mailbox.

..

.. bpo: 15646
.. date: 8834
.. nonce: VbhKq4
.. section: Library

Prevent equivalent of a fork bomb when using multiprocessing on Windows
without the "if __name__ == '__main__'" idiom.

..

.. bpo: 15567
.. date: 8833
.. nonce: MGuZ8N
.. section: Library

Fix NameError when running threading._test

..

.. bpo: 15424
.. date: 8832
.. nonce: 6ZaCfJ
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for array objects. Patch by Ludwig Hähne.

..

.. bpo: 15538
.. date: 8831
.. nonce: CJHtAs
.. section: Library

Fix compilation of the getnameinfo() / getaddrinfo() emulation code.  Patch
by Philipp Hagemeister.

..

.. bpo: 12288
.. date: 8830
.. nonce: EeBUVC
.. section: Library

Consider '0' and '0.0' as valid initialvalue for tkinter SimpleDialog.

..

.. bpo: 15489
.. date: 8829
.. nonce: P9-vH9
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for BytesIO objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15469
.. date: 8828
.. nonce: eFsJXX
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for deque objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15487
.. date: 8827
.. nonce: vtEBtw
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for buffered I/O objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15512
.. date: 8826
.. nonce: JO3bbV
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for parser. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15402
.. date: 8825
.. nonce: MWs0d1
.. section: Library

An issue in the struct module that caused sys.getsizeof to return incorrect
results for struct.Struct instances has been fixed. Initial patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15232
.. date: 8824
.. nonce: R723JW
.. section: Library

when mangle_from is True, email.Generator now correctly mangles lines that
start with 'From ' that occur in a MIME preamble or epilog.

..

.. bpo: 13922
.. date: 8823
.. nonce: mg0ypz
.. section: Library

argparse no longer incorrectly strips '--'s that appear after the first one.

..

.. bpo: 12353
.. date: 8822
.. nonce: S3NUQb
.. section: Library

argparse now correctly handles null argument values.

..

.. bpo: 6493
.. date: 8821
.. nonce: onAuOo
.. section: Library

An issue in ctypes on Windows that caused structure bitfields of type
ctypes.c_uint32 and width 32 to incorrectly be set has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 14635
.. date: 8820
.. nonce: R89rsl
.. section: Library

telnetlib will use poll() rather than select() when possible to avoid
failing due to the select() file descriptor limit.

..

.. bpo: 15247
.. date: 8819
.. nonce: XQlOgY
.. section: Library

FileIO now raises an error when given a file descriptor pointing to a
directory.

..

.. bpo: 14591
.. date: 8818
.. nonce: WiL398
.. section: Library

Fix bug in Random.jumpahead that could produce an invalid Mersenne Twister
state on 64-bit machines.

..

.. bpo: 5346
.. date: 8817
.. nonce: KazqNd
.. section: Library

Preserve permissions of mbox, MMDF and Babyl mailbox files on flush().

..

.. bpo: 15219
.. date: 8816
.. nonce: q8ah8W
.. section: Library

Fix a reference leak when hashlib.new() is called with invalid parameters.

..

.. bpo: 9559
.. date: 8815
.. nonce: HNrpSz
.. section: Library

If messages were only added, a new file is no longer created and renamed
over the old file when flush() is called on an mbox, MMDF or Babyl mailbox.

..

.. bpo: 14653
.. date: 8814
.. nonce: wxr1Hp
.. section: Library

email.utils.mktime_tz() no longer relies on system mktime() when timezone
offest is supplied.

..

.. bpo: 6056
.. date: 8813
.. nonce: QB7JkF
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing use setblocking(True) on the sockets it uses.  Original
patch by J Derek Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 15101
.. date: 8812
.. nonce: IWvk9X
.. section: Library

Make pool finalizer avoid joining current thread.

..

.. bpo: 15054
.. date: 8811
.. nonce: tE72L_
.. section: Library

A bug in tokenize.tokenize that caused string literals with 'b' and 'br'
prefixes to be incorrectly tokenized has been fixed. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15036
.. date: 8810
.. nonce: Mhm512
.. section: Library

Mailbox no longer throws an error if a flush is done between operations when
removing or changing multiple items in mbox, MMDF, or Babyl mailboxes.

..

.. bpo: 10133
.. date: 8809
.. nonce: RredST
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing deallocate buffer if socket read fails.  Patch by
Hallvard B Furuseth.

..

.. bpo: 13854
.. date: 8808
.. nonce: ms8PU3
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing properly handle non-integer non-string argument to
SystemExit.

..

.. bpo: 12157
.. date: 8807
.. nonce: awxWQJ
.. section: Library

Make pool.map() empty iterables correctly.  Initial patch by mouad.

..

.. bpo: 14036
.. date: 8806
.. nonce: wfrN3N
.. section: Library

Add an additional check to validate that port in urlparse does not go in
illegal range and returns None.

..

.. bpo: 14888
.. date: 8805
.. nonce: 8d3GPF
.. section: Library

Fix misbehaviour of the _md5 module when called on data larger than 2**32
bytes.

..

.. bpo: 15908
.. date: 8804
.. nonce: xfD3R4
.. section: Library

Fix misbehaviour of the sha1 module when called on data larger than 2**32
bytes.

..

.. bpo: 15910
.. date: 8803
.. nonce: Xik0eY
.. section: Library

Fix misbehaviour of _md5 and sha1 modules when "updating" on data larger
than 2**32 bytes.

..

.. bpo: 14875
.. date: 8802
.. nonce: pGNN-W
.. section: Library

Use float('inf') instead of float('1e66666') in the json module.

..

.. bpo: 14572
.. date: 8801
.. nonce: FxInwF
.. section: Library

Prevent build failures with pre-3.5.0 versions of sqlite3, such as was
shipped with Centos 5 and Mac OS X 10.4.

..

.. bpo: 14426
.. date: 8800
.. nonce: GSay45
.. section: Library

Correct the Date format in Expires attribute of Set-Cookie Header in
Cookie.py.

..

.. bpo: 14721
.. date: 8799
.. nonce: 3gDakm
.. section: Library

Send proper header, Content-length: 0 when the body is an empty string ''.
Initial Patch contributed by Arve Knudsen.

..

.. bpo: 14072
.. date: 8798
.. nonce: 4bVZye
.. section: Library

Fix parsing of 'tel' URIs in urlparse by making the check for ports
stricter.

..

.. bpo: 9374
.. date: 8797
.. nonce: 73g_V_
.. section: Library

Generic parsing of query and fragment portions of url for any scheme.
Supported both by RFC3986 and RFC2396.

..

.. bpo: 14798
.. date: 8796
.. nonce: uw_PT-
.. section: Library

Fix the functions in pyclbr to raise an ImportError when the first part of a
dotted name is not a package. Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 14832
.. date: 8795
.. nonce: ZyLvfY
.. section: Library

fixed the order of the argument references in the error message produced by
unittest's assertItemsEqual.

..

.. bpo: 14829
.. date: 8794
.. nonce: yWZKyP
.. section: Library

Fix bisect issues under 64-bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 14777
.. date: 8793
.. nonce: SS0XEf
.. section: Library

tkinter may return undecoded UTF-8 bytes as a string when accessing the Tk
clipboard.  Modify clipboard_get() to first request type UTF8_STRING when no
specific type is requested in an X11 windowing environment, falling back to
the current default type STRING if that fails. Original patch by Thomas
Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 12541
.. date: 8792
.. nonce: srvUYa
.. section: Library

Be lenient with quotes around Realm field with HTTP Basic Authentation in
urllib2.

..

.. bpo: 14662
.. date: 8791
.. nonce: kBgGen
.. section: Library

Prevent shutil failures on OS X when destination does not support chflag
operations.  Patch by Hynek Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 14157
.. date: 8790
.. nonce: QVP6vO
.. section: Library

Fix time.strptime failing without a year on February 29th. Patch by Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 14768
.. date: 8789
.. nonce: UFzrQa
.. section: Library

os.path.expanduser('~/a') doesn't work correctly when HOME is '/'.

..

.. bpo: 13183
.. date: 8788
.. nonce: WXohoU
.. section: Library

Fix pdb skipping frames after hitting a breakpoint and running step.  Patch
by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 14664
.. date: 8787
.. nonce: pdyfQE
.. section: Library

It is now possible to use @unittest.skip{If,Unless} on a test class that
doesn't inherit from TestCase (i.e. a mixin).

..

.. bpo: 14160
.. date: 8786
.. nonce: eP9a5e
.. section: Library

TarFile.extractfile() failed to resolve symbolic links when the links were
not located in an archive subdirectory.

..

.. bpo: 14638
.. date: 8785
.. nonce: cfMimX
.. section: Library

pydoc now treats non-string __name__ values as if they were missing, instead
of raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 13684
.. date: 8784
.. nonce: GMakQh
.. section: Library

Fix httplib tunnel issue of infinite loops for certain sites which send EOF
without trailing \r\n.

..

.. bpo: 14308
.. date: 8783
.. nonce: VI_YtW
.. section: Library

Fix an exception when a "dummy" thread is in the threading module's active
list after a fork().

..

.. bpo: 14538
.. date: 8782
.. nonce: l61eIV
.. section: Library

HTMLParser can now parse correctly start tags that contain a bare '/'.

..

.. bpo: 14452
.. date: 8781
.. nonce: TPNgz8
.. section: Library

SysLogHandler no longer inserts a UTF-8 BOM into the message.

..

.. bpo: 13496
.. date: 8780
.. nonce: ZTq6yk
.. section: Library

Fix potential overflow in bisect.bisect algorithm when applied to a
collection of size > sys.maxsize / 2.

..

.. bpo: 14399
.. date: 8779
.. nonce: ucnoq5
.. section: Library

zipfile now recognizes that the archive has been modified even if only the
comment is changed.  As a consequence of this fix, ZipFile is now a new
style class.

..

.. bpo: 7978
.. date: 8778
.. nonce: DdYwzu
.. section: Library

SocketServer now restarts the select() call when EINTR is returned.  This
avoids crashing the server loop when a signal is received. Patch by Jerzy
Kozera.

..

.. bpo: 10340
.. date: 8777
.. nonce: QZDDK-
.. section: Library

asyncore - properly handle EINVAL in dispatcher constructor on OSX; avoid to
call handle_connect in case of a disconnected socket which was not meant to
connect.

..

.. bpo: 12757
.. date: 8776
.. nonce: lfCCKo
.. section: Library

Fix the skipping of doctests when python is run with -OO so that it works in
unittest's verbose mode as well as non-verbose mode.

..

.. bpo: 13694
.. date: 8775
.. nonce: qresWC
.. section: Library

asynchronous connect in asyncore.dispatcher does not set addr attribute.

..

.. bpo: 10484
.. date: 8774
.. nonce: NgDSdJ
.. section: Library

Fix the CGIHTTPServer's PATH_INFO handling problem.

..

.. bpo: 11199
.. date: 8773
.. nonce: UMivCa
.. section: Library

Fix the with urllib which hangs on particular ftp urls.

..

.. bpo: 14252
.. date: 8772
.. nonce: -5zjL9
.. section: Library

Fix subprocess.Popen.terminate() to not raise an error under Windows when
the child process has already exited.

..

.. bpo: 14195
.. date: 8771
.. nonce: XpCJYQ
.. section: Library

An issue that caused weakref.WeakSet instances to incorrectly return True
for a WeakSet instance 'a' in both 'a < a' and 'a > a' has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 14159
.. date: 8770
.. nonce: -rJiOd
.. section: Library

Fix the len() of weak sets to return a better approximation when some
objects are dead or dying.  Moreover, the implementation is now O(1) rather
than O(n).

..

.. bpo: 2945
.. date: 8769
.. nonce: QZCfeH
.. section: Library

Make the distutils upload command aware of bdist_rpm products.

..

.. bpo: 6884
.. date: 8768
.. nonce: w-DWFF
.. section: Library

Fix long-standing bugs with MANIFEST.in parsing in distutils on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16441
.. date: 8767
.. nonce: zm1gad
.. section: Library

Avoid excessive memory usage working with large gzip files using the gzip
module.

..

.. bpo: 15782
.. date: 8766
.. nonce: c-rtHz
.. section: Library

Prevent compile errors of OS X Carbon modules _Fm, _Qd, and _Qdoffs when
compiling with an SDK of 10.7 or later.  The OS X APIs they wrap have long
been deprecated and have now been removed with 10.7. These modules were
already empty for 64-bit builds and have been removed in Python 3.

..

.. bpo: 17477
.. date: 8765
.. nonce: mkozKG
.. section: Library

Update the bsddb module to pybsddb 5.3.0, supporting db-5.x, and dropping
support for db-4.1 and db-4.2.

..

.. bpo: 17192
.. date: 8764
.. nonce: U0oKFo
.. section: Library

Update the ctypes module's libffi to v3.0.13.  This specifically addresses a
stack misalignment issue on x86 and issues on some more recent platforms.

..

.. bpo: 12268
.. date: 8763
.. nonce: cWvcGA
.. section: Library

The io module file object write methods no longer abort early when a write
system calls is interrupted (EINTR).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8762
.. nonce: R41GNw
.. section: Library

Fix the leak of a dict in the time module when used in an embedded
interpreter that is repeatedly initialized and shutdown and reinitialized.

..

.. bpo: 12268
.. date: 8761
.. nonce: _DnsP2
.. section: Library

File readline, readlines and read or readall methods no longer lose data
when an underlying read system call is interrupted within an io module
object.  IOError is no longer raised due to a read system call returning
EINTR from within these methods.

..

.. bpo: 16012
.. date: 8760
.. nonce: O3e6G-
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in pyexpat. The parser's UseForeignDTD() method doesn't
require an argument again.

..

.. bpo: 13590
.. date: 8759
.. nonce: 1aEwh4
.. section: Library

OS X Xcode 4 - improve support for universal extension modules In
particular, fix extension module build failures when trying to use
32-bit-only installer Pythons on systems with Xcode 4 (currently OS X 10.8, 10.7,
and optionally 10.6). * Backport 3.3.0 fixes to 2.7 branch (for release in
2.7.4) * Since Xcode 4 removes ppc support, extension module builds now
check for ppc compiler support and by default remove ppc and   ppc64 archs
when they are not available. * Extension module builds now revert to using
system installed   headers and libs (/usr and /System/Library) if the SDK
used   to build the interpreter is not installed or has moved. * Try to
avoid building extension modules with deprecated   and problematic Apple
llvm-gcc compiler.  If original compiler   is not available, use clang
instead by default.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8758
.. nonce: hHxr-m
.. section: IDLE

IDLE was displaying spurious SystemExit tracebacks when running scripts that
terminated by raising SystemExit (i.e. unittest and turtledemo).

..

.. bpo: 9290
.. date: 8757
.. nonce: Msbacw
.. section: IDLE

In IDLE the sys.std* streams now implement io.TextIOBase interface and
support all mandatory methods and properties.

..

.. bpo: 16829
.. date: 8756
.. nonce: u44Uel
.. section: IDLE

IDLE printing no longer fails if there are spaces or other special
characters in the file path.

..

.. bpo: 16819
.. date: 8755
.. nonce: rcJDrk
.. section: IDLE

IDLE method completion now correctly works for unicode literals.

..

.. bpo: 16504
.. date: 8754
.. nonce: othtN_
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now catches SyntaxErrors raised by tokenizer. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 1207589
.. date: 8753
.. nonce: 0bmiue
.. section: IDLE

Add Cut/Copy/Paste items to IDLE right click Context Menu. Patch by Todd
Rovito.

..

.. bpo: 13052
.. date: 8752
.. nonce: ulRmqo
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE crashing when replace string in Search/Replace dialog ended with
'\'. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 9803
.. date: 8751
.. nonce: lJhnei
.. section: IDLE

Don't close IDLE on saving if breakpoint is open. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 14958
.. date: 8750
.. nonce: fWA3Eh
.. section: IDLE

Change IDLE systax highlighting to recognize all string and byte literals
currently supported in Python 2.7.

..

.. bpo: 14962
.. date: 8749
.. nonce: W_t8Sw
.. section: IDLE

Update text coloring in IDLE shell window after changing options.  Patch by
Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 10997
.. date: 8748
.. nonce: D59Zo_
.. section: IDLE

Prevent a duplicate entry in IDLE's "Recent Files" menu.

..

.. bpo: 12510
.. date: 8747
.. nonce: 5hlN77
.. section: IDLE

Attempting to get invalid tooltip no longer closes IDLE. Original patch by
Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 10365
.. date: 8746
.. nonce: DI-DrH
.. section: IDLE

File open dialog now works instead of crashing even when parent window is
closed. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 14876
.. date: 8745
.. nonce: 73XqgG
.. section: IDLE

Use user-selected font for highlight configuration. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 14409
.. date: 8744
.. nonce: 8SNyRR
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now properly executes commands in the Shell window when it cannot read
the normal config files on startup and has to use the built-in default key
bindings. There was previously a bug in one of the defaults.

..

.. bpo: 3573
.. date: 8743
.. nonce: FIbWrY
.. section: IDLE

IDLE hangs when passing invalid command line args (directory(ies) instead of
file(s)) (Patch by Guilherme Polo)

..

.. bpo: 5219
.. date: 8742
.. nonce: We72rp
.. section: IDLE

Prevent event handler cascade in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 15318
.. date: 8741
.. nonce: H1-iES
.. section: IDLE

Prevent writing to sys.stdin.

..

.. bpo: 13532
.. date: 8740
.. nonce: csNEK_
.. section: IDLE

Check that arguments to sys.stdout.write are strings. (See also: bpo-15319)

..

.. bpo: 10365
.. date: 8739
.. nonce: MInibr
.. section: IDLE

File open dialog now works instead of crashing even when parent window is
closed while dialog is open.

..

.. bpo: 14018
.. date: 8738
.. nonce: HjN-7b
.. section: IDLE

Update checks for unstable system Tcl/Tk versions on OS X to include
versions shipped with OS X 10.7 and 10.8 in addition to 10.6.

..

.. bpo: 15853
.. date: 8737
.. nonce: Re1tK-
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE crash on OS X when opening Preferences menu with certain
versions of Tk 8.5.  Initial patch by Kevin Walzer.

..

.. bpo: 16702
.. date: 8736
.. nonce: 3Xf_t-
.. section: Tests

test_urllib2_localnet tests now correctly ignores proxies for localhost
tests.

..

.. bpo: 13447
.. date: 8735
.. nonce: _wys-6
.. section: Tests

Add a test file to host regression tests for bugs in the scripts found in
the Tools directory.

..

.. bpo: 11420
.. date: 8734
.. nonce: J5oaxT
.. section: Tests

make test suite pass with -B/DONTWRITEBYTECODE set. Initial patch by Thomas
Wouters.

..

.. bpo: 17299
.. date: 8733
.. nonce: N_JA1r
.. section: Tests

Add test coverage for cPickle with file objects and general IO objects.
Original patch by Aman Shah.

..

.. bpo: 11963
.. date: 8732
.. nonce: _g8d_g
.. section: Tests

remove human verification from test_parser and test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 17249
.. date: 8731
.. nonce: wGvw7G
.. section: Tests

convert a test in test_capi to use unittest and reap threads.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8730
.. nonce: eaH1rt
.. section: Tests

We now run both test_email.py and test_email_renamed.py when running the
test_email regression test.  test_email_renamed contains some tests that
test_email does not.

..

.. bpo: 17041
.. date: 8729
.. nonce: 57V5iD
.. section: Tests

Fix testing when Python is configured with the --without-doc-strings option.

..

.. bpo: 15539
.. date: 8728
.. nonce: a1_G0Q
.. section: Tests

Added regression tests for Tools/scripts/pindent.py.

..

.. bpo: 15324
.. date: 8727
.. nonce: VlPGUN
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest parsing of --fromfile and --randomize options.

..

.. bpo: 16618
.. date: 8726
.. nonce: a2Xoyn
.. section: Tests

Add more regression tests for glob. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16664
.. date: 8725
.. nonce: CxbZwX
.. section: Tests

Add regression tests for glob's behaviour concerning entries starting with a
".".  Patch by Sebastian Kreft.

..

.. bpo: 15747
.. date: 8724
.. nonce: TE3rVk
.. section: Tests

ZFS always returns EOPNOTSUPP when attempting to set the UF_IMMUTABLE flag
(via either chflags or lchflags); refactor affected tests in test_posix.py
to account for this.

..

.. bpo: 16549
.. date: 8723
.. nonce: 9ENPOM
.. section: Tests

Add tests for json.tools.  Initial patch by Berker Peksag and Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16559
.. date: 8722
.. nonce: JvxWbq
.. section: Tests

Add more tests for the json module, including some from the official test
suite at json.org.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16274
.. date: 8721
.. nonce: 9-uVb_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_asyncore on Solaris.  Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 15040
.. date: 8720
.. nonce: F30TYe
.. section: Tests

Close files in mailbox tests for PyPy compatibility. Original patch by Matti
Picus.

..

.. bpo: 15802
.. date: 8719
.. nonce: Ow-zrD
.. section: Tests

Fix test logic in TestMaildir.test_create_tmp. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15765
.. date: 8718
.. nonce: rH6KB2
.. section: Tests

Extend a previous fix to Solaris and OpenBSD for quirky getcwd() behaviour
(issue #9185) to NetBSD as well.

..

.. bpo: 15615
.. date: 8717
.. nonce: C9YuEt
.. section: Tests

Add some tests for the json module's handling of invalid input data.  Patch
by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 15496
.. date: 8716
.. nonce: tm76dD
.. section: Tests

Add directory removal helpers for tests on Windows. Patch by Jeremy Kloth.

..

.. bpo: 15043
.. date: 8715
.. nonce: R2j8Hb
.. section: Tests

test_gdb is now skipped entirely if gdb security settings block loading of
the gdb hooks

..

.. bpo: 14589
.. date: 8714
.. nonce: 9aNtuR
.. section: Tests

Update certificate chain for sha256.tbs-internet.com, fixing a test failure
in test_ssl.

..

.. bpo: 16698
.. date: 8713
.. nonce: RgmYjY
.. section: Tests

Skip posix test_getgroups when built with OS X deployment target prior to
10.6.

..

.. bpo: 17111
.. date: 8712
.. nonce: ypc66r
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_surrogates (test_fileio) failure on OS X 10.4.

..

.. bpo: 17425
.. date: 8711
.. nonce: wTCSht
.. section: Build

Build against openssl 0.9.8y on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16004
.. date: 8710
.. nonce: 5o_DZo
.. section: Build

Add `make touch`.

..

.. bpo: 5033
.. date: 8709
.. nonce: HKAgDA
.. section: Build

Fix building of the sqlite3 extension module when the SQLite library version
has "beta" in it. Patch by Andreas Pelme.

..

.. bpo: 17228
.. date: 8708
.. nonce: CCkAM0
.. section: Build

Fix building without pymalloc.

..

.. bpo: 17086
.. date: 8707
.. nonce: iNoopm
.. section: Build

Backport the patches from the 3.3 branch to cross-build the package.

..

.. bpo: 3754
.. date: 8706
.. nonce: sUdOUp
.. section: Build

fix typo in pthread AC_CACHE_VAL.

..

.. bpo: 17029
.. date: 8705
.. nonce: dUd1NT
.. section: Build

Let h2py search the multiarch system include directory.

..

.. bpo: 16953
.. date: 8704
.. nonce: tW1KVY
.. section: Build

Fix socket module compilation on platforms with HAVE_BROKEN_POLL. Patch by
Jeffrey Armstrong.

..

.. bpo: 16836
.. date: 8703
.. nonce: JZ-zO7
.. section: Build

Enable IPv6 support even if IPv6 is disabled on the build host.

..

.. bpo: 15923
.. date: 8702
.. nonce: PIv70V
.. section: Build

fix a mistake in asdl_c.py that resulted in a TypeError after 2801bf875a24
(see #15801).

..

.. bpo: 11715
.. date: 8701
.. nonce: M3MapP
.. section: Build

Fix multiarch detection without having Debian development tools (dpkg-dev)
installed.

..

.. bpo: 15819
.. date: 8700
.. nonce: 09XLHb
.. section: Build

Make sure we can build Python out-of-tree from a readonly source directory.
(Somewhat related to Issue #9860.)

..

.. bpo: 15822
.. date: 8699
.. nonce: aLjenQ
.. section: Build

Ensure 2to3 grammar pickles are properly installed.

..

.. bpo: 15560
.. date: 8698
.. nonce: I8yMU0
.. section: Build

Fix building _sqlite3 extension on OS X with an SDK.

..

.. bpo: 8847
.. date: 8697
.. nonce: lqI_r8
.. section: Build

Disable COMDAT folding in Windows PGO builds.

..

.. bpo: 14018
.. date: 8696
.. nonce: RHawO_
.. section: Build

Fix OS X Tcl/Tk framework checking when using OS X SDKs.

..

.. bpo: 16256
.. date: 8695
.. nonce: vrx66r
.. section: Build

OS X installer now sets correct permissions for doc directory.

..

.. bpo: 8767
.. date: 8694
.. nonce: swHbgQ
.. section: Build

Restore building with --disable-unicode. Patch by Stefano Taschini.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8693
.. nonce: wZLzuy
.. section: Build

Build against bzip2 1.0.6 and openssl 0.9.8x on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 14557
.. date: 8692
.. nonce: UCbIq7
.. section: Build

Fix extensions build on HP-UX. Patch by Adi Roiban.

..

.. bpo: 14437
.. date: 8691
.. nonce: 61tmQt
.. section: Build

Fix building the _io module under Cygwin.

..

.. bpo: 15587
.. date: 8690
.. nonce: gR7vei
.. section: Build

Enable Tk high-resolution text rendering on Macs with Retina displays.
Applies to Tkinter apps, such as IDLE, on OS X framework builds linked with
Cocoa Tk 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 17161
.. date: 8689
.. nonce: 8Qr4fl
.. section: Build

make install now also installs a python2 and python man page.

..

.. bpo: 16848
.. date: 8688
.. nonce: CtyvVC
.. section: Build

python-config now returns proper --ldflags values for OS X framework builds.

..

.. bpo: 17156
.. date: 8687
.. nonce: iaFJiz
.. section: Tools/Demos

pygettext.py now correctly escapes non-ascii characters.

..

.. bpo: 15539
.. date: 8686
.. nonce: 6bqqV-
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a number of bugs in Tools/scripts/pindent.py.  Now pindent.py works with
a "with" statement.  pindent.py no longer produces improper indentation.
pindent.py now works with continued lines broken after "class" or "def"
keywords and with continuations at the start of line.

..

.. bpo: 16476
.. date: 8685
.. nonce: xAomrd
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix json.tool to avoid including trailing whitespace.

..

.. bpo: 13301
.. date: 8684
.. nonce: A4WOk5
.. section: Tools/Demos

use ast.literal_eval() instead of eval() in Tools/i18n/msgfmt.py. Patch by
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15041
.. date: 8683
.. nonce: nMyhwF
.. section: Documentation

Update "see also" list in tkinter documentation.

..

.. bpo: 17412
.. date: 8682
.. nonce: 9xIwEh
.. section: Documentation

update 2.7 Doc/make.bat to also use sphinx-1.0.7.

..

.. bpo: 17047
.. date: 8681
.. nonce: sVzpby
.. section: Documentation

remove doubled words in docs and docstrings reported by Serhiy Storchaka and
Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 16406
.. date: 8680
.. nonce: _Z8alE
.. section: Documentation

combine the pages for uploading and registering to PyPI.

..

.. bpo: 16403
.. date: 8679
.. nonce: wPuYgA
.. section: Documentation

Document how distutils uses the maintainer field in PKG-INFO. Patch by Jyrki
Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16695
.. date: 8678
.. nonce: O3-q4k
.. section: Documentation

Document how glob handles filenames starting with a dot. Initial patch by
Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 8890
.. date: 8677
.. nonce: ldKgWT
.. section: Documentation

Stop advertising an insecure practice by replacing uses of the /tmp
directory with better alternatives in the documentation. Patch by Geoff
Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 17203
.. date: 8676
.. nonce: b42JWx
.. section: Documentation

add long option names to unittest discovery docs.

..

.. bpo: 13094
.. date: 8675
.. nonce: ujdNxz
.. section: Documentation

add "Why do lambdas defined in a loop with different values all return the
same result?" programming FAQ.

..

.. bpo: 14901
.. date: 8674
.. nonce: o_thZo
.. section: Documentation

Update portions of the Windows FAQ. Patch by Ashish Nitin Patil.

..

.. bpo: 15990
.. date: 8673
.. nonce: 41C5_M
.. section: Documentation

Improve argument/parameter documentation.

..

.. bpo: 16400
.. date: 8672
.. nonce: kDLZRV
.. section: Documentation

Update the description of which versions of a given package PyPI displays.

..

.. bpo: 15677
.. date: 8671
.. nonce: _0vY-h
.. section: Documentation

Document that zlib and gzip accept a compression level of 0 to mean 'no
compression'. Patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 8040
.. date: 8670
.. nonce: R8VAys
.. section: Documentation

added a version switcher to the documentation.  Patch by Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 16115
.. date: 8669
.. nonce: Ba1MH_
.. section: Documentation

Improve subprocess.Popen() documentation around args, shell, and executable
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 15979
.. date: 8668
.. nonce: UATtRZ
.. section: Documentation

Improve timeit documentation.

..

.. bpo: 16036
.. date: 8667
.. nonce: AGR4Am
.. section: Documentation

Improve documentation of built-in int()'s signature and arguments.

..

.. bpo: 15935
.. date: 8666
.. nonce: Ik7Y0z
.. section: Documentation

Clarification of argparse docs, re: add_argument() type and default
arguments.  Patch contributed by Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 13769
.. date: 8665
.. nonce: TfRtQT
.. section: Documentation

Document the effect of ensure_ascii to the return type of JSON decoding
functions.

..

.. bpo: 14880
.. date: 8664
.. nonce: bfazFx
.. section: Documentation

Fix kwargs notation in csv.reader, .writer & .register_dialect. Patch by
Chris Rebert.

..

.. bpo: 14674
.. date: 8663
.. nonce: AMOJT_
.. section: Documentation

Add a discussion of the json module's standard compliance. Patch by Chris
Rebert.

..

.. bpo: 15630
.. date: 8662
.. nonce: ijhqyT
.. section: Documentation

Add an example for "continue" stmt in the tutorial. Patch by Daniel Ellis.

..

.. bpo: 13557
.. date: 8661
.. nonce: IHzHRn
.. section: Documentation

Clarify effect of giving two different namespaces to exec or execfile().

..

.. bpo: 14034
.. date: 8660
.. nonce: 34GDTv
.. section: Documentation

added the argparse tutorial.

..

.. bpo: 15250
.. date: 8659
.. nonce: vLLPGK
.. section: Documentation

Document that filecmp.dircmp compares files shallowly. Patch contributed by
Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 15116
.. date: 8658
.. nonce: uDQI_8
.. section: Documentation

Remove references to appscript as it is no longer being supported.
