.. bpo: 35746
.. date: 2019-01-15-18-16-05
.. nonce: nMSd0j
.. release date: 2019-02-16
.. section: Security

[CVE-2019-5010] Fix a NULL pointer deref in ssl module. The cert parser did
not handle CRL distribution points with empty DP or URI correctly. A
malicious or buggy certificate can result into segfault. Vulnerability
(TALOS-2018-0758) reported by Colin Read and Nicolas Edet of Cisco.

..

.. bpo: 16039
.. date: 2018-12-11-16-00-57
.. nonce: PCj2n4
.. section: Security

CVE-2013-1752: Change use of ``readline()`` in :class:`imaplib.IMAP4_SSL` to
limit line length.

..

.. bpo: 28043
.. date: 2018-11-20-16-50-03
.. nonce: qOoOqW
.. section: Security

SSLContext has improved default settings: OP_NO_SSLv2, OP_NO_SSLv3,
OP_NO_COMPRESSION, OP_CIPHER_SERVER_PREFERENCE, OP_SINGLE_DH_USE,
OP_SINGLE_ECDH_USE and HIGH ciphers without MD5.

..

.. bpo: 34791
.. date: 2018-09-24-18-49-25
.. nonce: 78GmIG
.. section: Security

The xml.sax and xml.dom.domreg no longer use environment variables to
override parser implementations when sys.flags.ignore_environment is set by
-E or -I arguments.

..

.. bpo: 34623
.. date: 2018-09-10-16-05-39
.. nonce: Ua9jMv
.. section: Security

CVE-2018-14647: The C accelerated _elementtree module now initializes hash
randomization salt from _Py_HashSecret instead of libexpat's default CSPRNG.

..

.. bpo: 34540
.. date: 2018-08-28-22-11-54
.. nonce: gfQ0TM
.. section: Security

When ``shutil.make_archive`` falls back to the external ``zip`` problem, it
uses :mod:`subprocess` to invoke it rather than :mod:`distutils.spawn`. This
closes a possible shell injection vector.

..

.. bpo: 34405
.. date: 2018-08-15-12-14-03
.. nonce: R4IZGw
.. section: Security

Updated to OpenSSL 1.0.2p for Windows builds.

..

.. bpo: 35552
.. date: 2018-12-21-13-29-30
.. nonce: 1DzQQc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Format character ``%s`` in :c:func:`PyString_FromFormat` no longer read
memory past the limit if *precision* is specified.

..

.. bpo: 35504
.. date: 2018-12-15-14-01-45
.. nonce: JtKczP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfaults and :exc:`SystemError`\ s when deleting certain attributes.
Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 35368
.. date: 2018-11-30-17-50-28
.. nonce: DNaDao
.. section: Core and Builtins

:c:func:`PyMem_Malloc` is now also thread-safe in debug mode.

..

.. bpo: 35214
.. date: 2018-11-13-17-20-18
.. nonce: AH2F87
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed an out of bounds memory access when parsing a truncated unicode escape
sequence at the end of a string such as ``u'\N'``.  It would read one byte
beyond the end of the memory allocation.

..

.. bpo: 34974
.. date: 2018-10-13-22-24-19
.. nonce: 7LgTc2
.. section: Core and Builtins

The :class:`bytearray` constructor no longer convert unexpected exceptions
(e.g. :exc:`MemoryError` and :exc:`KeyboardInterrupt`) to :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. bpo: 22851
.. date: 2018-09-17-04-41-42
.. nonce: 0hsJPh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segfault when accessing ``generator.gi_frame.f_restricted`` when the
generator is exhausted.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 18560
.. date: 2018-08-23-21-32-27
.. nonce: 5q_c1C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential NULL pointer dereference in sum().

..

.. bpo: 34400
.. date: 2018-08-14-03-52-43
.. nonce: AJD0bz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behavior in parsetok.c.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 25083
.. date: 2018-07-25-22-47-19
.. nonce: HT_hXh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Adding I/O error checking when reading .py files and aborting importing on
error.

..

.. bpo: 25943
.. date: 2018-07-18-23-40-32
.. nonce: Zgf99y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential heap corruption in the :mod:`bsddb` module.  Patch by Zackery
Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34068
.. date: 2018-07-14-08-58-46
.. nonce: 9xfM55
.. section: Core and Builtins

In :meth:`io.IOBase.close`, ensure that the :attr:`~io.IOBase.closed`
attribute is not set with a live exception.  Patch by Zackery Spytz and
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 34080
.. date: 2018-07-10-11-24-16
.. nonce: 8t7PtO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a memory leak in the compiler when it raised some uncommon errors
during tokenizing.

..

.. bpo: 33956
.. date: 2018-06-25-20-42-44
.. nonce: 1qoTwD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update vendored Expat library copy to version 2.2.5.

..

.. bpo: 30654
.. date: 2018-05-28-12-28-53
.. nonce: 9fDJye
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed reset of the SIGINT handler to SIG_DFL on interpreter shutdown even
when there was a custom handler set previously. Patch by Philipp Kerling.

..

.. bpo: 33645
.. date: 2018-05-25-18-20-04
.. nonce: GYGIPH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed an "unknown parsing error" on parsing the "<>" operator when run
Python with both options ``-3`` and ``-We``.

..

.. bpo: 33622
.. date: 2018-05-23-20-46-14
.. nonce: xPucO9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a leak when the garbage collector fails to add an object with the
``__del__`` method or referenced by it into the :data:`gc.garbage` list.
:c:func:`PyGC_Collect` can now be called when an exception is set and
preserves it.

..

.. bpo: 33391
.. date: 2018-05-02-08-36-03
.. nonce: z4a7rb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a leak in set_symmetric_difference().

..

.. bpo: 25750
.. date: 2018-03-14-21-42-17
.. nonce: lxgkQz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix rare Python crash due to bad refcounting in ``type_getattro()`` if a
descriptor deletes itself from the class. Patch by Jeroen Demeyer.

..

.. bpo: 25862
.. date: 2017-10-07-10-13-15
.. nonce: FPYBA5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix assertion failures in the ``tell()`` method of ``io.TextIOWrapper``.
Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 8765
.. date: 2018-12-12-09-59-41
.. nonce: IFupT2
.. section: Library

The write() method of buffered and unbuffered binary streams in the io
module emits now a DeprecationWarning in Py3k mode for unicode argument.

..

.. bpo: 35052
.. date: 2018-12-10-09-48-27
.. nonce: xE1ymg
.. section: Library

Fix xml.dom.minidom cloneNode() on a document with an entity: pass the
correct arguments to the user data handler of an entity.

..

.. bpo: 10496
.. date: 2018-12-05-17-42-49
.. nonce: laV_IE
.. section: Library

:func:`~distutils.utils.check_environ` of :mod:`distutils.utils` now catchs
:exc:`KeyError` on calling :func:`pwd.getpwuid`: don't create the ``HOME``
environment variable in this case.

..

.. bpo: 10496
.. date: 2018-12-05-13-37-39
.. nonce: VH-1Lp
.. section: Library

:func:`posixpath.expanduser` now returns the input *path* unchanged if the
``HOME`` environment variable is not set and the current user has no home
directory (if the current user identifier doesn't exist in the password
database). This change fix the :mod:`site` module if the current user
doesn't exist in the password database (if the user has no home directory).

..

.. bpo: 24746
.. date: 2018-11-22-15-22-56
.. nonce: eSLKBE
.. section: Library

Avoid stripping trailing whitespace in doctest fancy diff. Orignial patch by
R. David Murray & Jairo Trad. Enhanced by Sanyam Khurana.

..

.. bpo: 35277
.. date: 2018-11-19-07-22-04
.. nonce: dsD-2E
.. section: Library

Update ensurepip to install pip 18.1 and setuptools 40.6.2.

..

.. bpo: 35062
.. date: 2018-10-29-23-09-24
.. nonce: dQS1ng
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect parsing of :class:`_io.IncrementalNewlineDecoder`'s
*translate* argument.

..

.. bpo: 35079
.. date: 2018-10-26-22-53-16
.. nonce: Tm5jvF
.. section: Library

Improve difflib.SequenceManager.get_matching_blocks doc by adding 'non-
overlapping' and changing '!=' to '<'.

..

.. bpo: 35017
.. date: 2018-10-26-00-11-21
.. nonce: 6Ez4Cv
.. section: Library

:meth:`socketserver.BaseServer.serve_forever` now exits immediately if it's
:meth:`~socketserver.BaseServer.shutdown` method is called while it is
polling for new events.

..

.. bpo: 34794
.. date: 2018-10-21-14-53-19
.. nonce: yt3R4-
.. section: Library

Fixed a leak in Tkinter when pass the Python wrapper around Tcl_Obj back to
Tcl/Tk.

..

.. bpo: 23420
.. date: 2018-10-17-11-00-00
.. nonce: Lq74Uu
.. section: Library

Verify the value for the parameter '-s' of the cProfile CLI. Patch by Robert
Kuska

..

.. bpo: 16965
.. date: 2018-10-12-20-30-42
.. nonce: xo5LAr
.. section: Library

The :term:`2to3` :2to3fixer:`execfile` fixer now opens the file with mode
``'rb'``.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34936
.. date: 2018-10-08-21-05-11
.. nonce: 3tRqdq
.. section: Library

Fix ``TclError`` in ``tkinter.Spinbox.selection_element()``. Patch by
Juliette Monsel.

..

.. bpo: 34866
.. date: 2018-10-03-11-07-28
.. nonce: ML6KpJ
.. section: Library

Adding ``max_num_fields`` to ``cgi.FieldStorage`` to make DOS attacks harder
by limiting the number of ``MiniFieldStorage`` objects created by
``FieldStorage``.

..

.. bpo: 34738
.. date: 2018-09-19-16-51-04
.. nonce: Pr3-iG
.. section: Library

ZIP files created by :mod:`distutils` will now include entries for
directories.

..

.. bpo: 34652
.. date: 2018-09-12-14-46-51
.. nonce: Rt1m1b
.. section: Library

Ensure :func:`os.lchmod` is never defined on Linux.

..

.. bpo: 34625
.. date: 2018-09-10-17-46-51
.. nonce: D2YfDz
.. section: Library

Update vendorized expat library version to 2.2.6.

..

.. bpo: 34610
.. date: 2018-09-08-12-57-07
.. nonce: wmoP5j
.. section: Library

Fixed iterator of :class:`multiprocessing.managers.DictProxy`.

..

.. bpo: 34530
.. date: 2018-09-03-23-23-32
.. nonce: h_Xsu7
.. section: Library

``distutils.spawn.find_executable()`` now falls back on :data:`os.defpath`
if the ``PATH`` environment variable is not set.

..

.. bpo: 34472
.. date: 2018-08-23-09-25-08
.. nonce: cGyYrO
.. section: Library

Improved compatibility for streamed files in :mod:`zipfile`. Previously an
optional signature was not being written and certain ZIP applications were
not supported. Patch by Silas Sewell.

..

.. bpo: 6700
.. date: 2018-08-22-17-43-52
.. nonce: hp7C4B
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getsourcelines for module level frames/tracebacks. Patch by
Vladimir Matveev.

..

.. bpo: 31715
.. date: 2018-08-15-16-22-30
.. nonce: Iw8jS8
.. section: Library

Associate ``.mjs`` file extension with ``application/javascript`` MIME Type.

..

.. bpo: 32947
.. date: 2018-08-14-08-57-01
.. nonce: mqStVW
.. section: Library

Add OP_ENABLE_MIDDLEBOX_COMPAT and test workaround for TLSv1.3 for future
compatibility with OpenSSL 1.1.1.

..

.. bpo: 34341
.. date: 2018-08-06-11-01-18
.. nonce: E0b9p2
.. section: Library

Appending to the ZIP archive with the ZIP64 extension no longer grows the
size of extra fields of existing entries.

..

.. bpo: 34052
.. date: 2018-07-24-16-37-40
.. nonce: VbbFAE
.. section: Library

:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.create_aggregate`,
:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.create_function`,
:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.set_authorizer`,
:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.set_progress_handler` methods raises TypeError
when unhashable objects are passed as callable. These methods now don't pass
such objects to SQLite API. Previous behavior could lead to segfaults. Patch
by Sergey Fedoseev.

..

.. bpo: 34019
.. date: 2018-07-02-05-59-11
.. nonce: ZXJIife
.. section: Library

webbrowser: Correct the arguments passed to Opera Browser when opening a new
URL using the ``webbrowser`` module. Patch by Bumsik Kim.

..

.. bpo: 33974
.. date: 2018-06-28-14-56-44
.. nonce: SA8nNP
.. section: Library

Fixed passing lists and tuples of strings containing special characters
``"``, ``\``, ``{``, ``}`` and ``\n`` as options to :mod:`~tkinter.ttk`
widgets.

..

.. bpo: 26544
.. date: 2018-06-13-20-33-29
.. nonce: hQ1oMt
.. section: Library

Fixed implementation of :func:`platform.libc_ver`. It almost always returned
version '2.9' for glibc.

..

.. bpo: 33767
.. date: 2018-06-03-22-41-59
.. nonce: 2e82g3
.. section: Library

The concatenation (``+``) and repetition (``*``) sequence operations now
raise :exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`SystemError` when performed on
:class:`mmap.mmap` objects.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 11874
.. date: 2018-05-23-00-26-27
.. nonce: glK5iP
.. section: Library

Use a better regex when breaking usage into wrappable parts. Avoids bogus
assertion errors from custom metavar strings.

..

.. bpo: 33570
.. date: 2018-05-18-21-50-47
.. nonce: 7CZy4t
.. section: Library

Change TLS 1.3 cipher suite settings for compatibility with OpenSSL
1.1.1-pre6 and newer. OpenSSL 1.1.1 will have TLS 1.3 cipers enabled by
default.

..

.. bpo: 33542
.. date: 2018-05-16-09-30-27
.. nonce: idNAcs
.. section: Library

Prevent ``uuid.get_node`` from using a DUID instead of a MAC on Windows.
Patch by Zvi Effron

..

.. bpo: 33096
.. date: 2018-05-08-08-03-34
.. nonce: 0hsFhL
.. section: Library

Removed unintentionally backported from Python 3 Tkinter files.

..

.. bpo: 20087
.. date: 2018-05-05-18-02-24
.. nonce: lJrvXL
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping with glibc 2.27 supported locales.

..

.. bpo: 33422
.. date: 2018-05-05-09-53-05
.. nonce: 4FtQ0q
.. section: Library

Fix trailing quotation marks getting deleted when looking up byte/string
literals on pydoc. Patch by Andrés Delfino.

..

.. bpo: 33336
.. date: 2018-04-27-22-18-38
.. nonce: T8rxn0
.. section: Library

``imaplib`` now allows ``MOVE`` command in ``IMAP4.uid()`` (RFC 6851: IMAP
MOVE Extension) and potentially as a name of supported method of ``IMAP4``
object.

..

.. bpo: 33359
.. date: 2018-04-25-22-41-04
.. nonce: Nr4CzK
.. section: Library

Fix running ``python -m curses.has_key``.

..

.. bpo: 33131
.. date: 2018-04-20-10-43-17
.. nonce: L2E977
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled version of pip to 10.0.1.

..

.. bpo: 33308
.. date: 2018-04-18-19-12-25
.. nonce: fW75xi
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in the :mod:`parser` module when converting an ST object to a
tree of tuples or lists with ``line_info=False`` and ``col_info=True``.

..

.. bpo: 33256
.. date: 2018-04-10-20-57-14
.. nonce: ndHkqu
.. section: Library

Fix display of ``<module>`` call in the html produced by ``cgitb.html()``.
Patch by Stéphane Blondon.

..

.. bpo: 32861
.. date: 2018-04-02-20-44-54
.. nonce: HeBjzN
.. section: Library

The urllib.robotparser's ``__str__`` representation now includes wildcard
entries and the "Crawl-delay" and "Request-rate" fields. Patch by Michael
Lazar.

..

.. bpo: 33038
.. date: 2018-03-10-20-14-36
.. nonce: yA6CP5
.. section: Library

gzip.GzipFile no longer produces an AttributeError exception when used with
a file object with a non-string name attribute. Patch by Bo Bayles.

..

.. bpo: 32857
.. date: 2018-02-16-14-37-14
.. nonce: -XljAx
.. section: Library

In :mod:`tkinter`, ``after_cancel(None)`` now raises a :exc:`ValueError`
instead of canceling the first scheduled function.  Patch by Cheryl Sabella.

..

.. bpo: 32502
.. date: 2018-01-20-17-15-34
.. nonce: OXJfn7
.. section: Library

uuid.uuid1 no longer raises an exception if a 64-bit hardware address is
encountered.

..

.. bpo: 31608
.. date: 2017-10-29-10-37-55
.. nonce: wkp8Nw
.. section: Library

Raise a ``TypeError`` instead of crashing if a ``collections.deque``
subclass returns a non-deque from ``__new__``. Patch by Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 16865
.. date: 2017-09-29-16-40-38
.. nonce: l-f6I_
.. section: Library

Support arrays >=2GiB in :mod:`ctypes`.  Patch by Segev Finer.

..

.. bpo: 29456
.. date: 2017-08-24-17-55-39
.. nonce: XaB3MP
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in hangul normalization: u1176, u11a7 and u11c3

..

.. bpo: 35035
.. date: 2018-10-21-02-20-36
.. nonce: 4zBObK
.. section: Documentation

Rename documentation for :mod:`email.utils` to ``email.utils.rst``.

..

.. bpo: 34967
.. date: 2018-10-13-07-39-57
.. nonce: E40tFP
.. section: Documentation

Use app.add_object_type() instead of the deprecated Sphinx function
app.description_unit()

..

.. bpo: 13407
.. date: 2018-09-29-13-40-06
.. nonce: BRI-_D
.. section: Documentation

Add a note to :mod:`bz2` and :mod:`tarfile` stating that handling of
multi-stream bzip2 files is not supported.

..

.. bpo: 33503
.. date: 2018-05-14-20-08-58
.. nonce: Wvt0qg
.. section: Documentation

Fix broken pypi link

..

.. bpo: 34279
.. date: 2018-12-12-18-20-18
.. nonce: DhKcuP
.. section: Tests

:func:`test.support.run_unittest` no longer raise :exc:`TestDidNotRun` if
the test result contains skipped tests. The exception is now only raised if
no test have been run and no test have been skipped.

..

.. bpo: 34279
.. date: 2018-10-27-13-41-55
.. nonce: v0Xqxe
.. section: Tests

regrtest issue a warning when no tests have been executed in a particular
test file. Also, a new final result state is issued if no test have been
executed across all test files. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 34661
.. date: 2018-09-13-09-53-15
.. nonce: bdTamP
.. section: Tests

Fix test_shutil if unzip doesn't support -t.

..

.. bpo: 34542
.. date: 2018-08-29-16-30-52
.. nonce: 9stVAW
.. section: Tests

Use 3072 RSA keys and SHA-256 signature for test certs and keys.

..

.. bpo: 34391
.. date: 2018-08-16-18-48-47
.. nonce: ouNfxC
.. section: Tests

Fix ftplib test for TLS 1.3 by reading from data socket.

..

.. bpo: 34399
.. date: 2018-08-14-10-47-44
.. nonce: D_jd1G
.. section: Tests

Update all RSA keys and DH params to use at least 2048 bits.

..

.. bpo: 33901
.. date: 2018-06-19-14-04-21
.. nonce: OFW1Sr
.. section: Tests

Fix test_gdbm on macOS with gdbm 1.15: add a larger value to make sure that
the file size changes.

..

.. bpo: 33873
.. date: 2018-06-16-01-37-31
.. nonce: d86vab
.. section: Tests

Fix a bug in ``regrtest`` that caused an extra test to run if
--huntrleaks/-R was used. Exit with error in case that invalid parameters
are specified to --huntrleaks/-R (at least one warmup run and one repetition
must be used).

..

.. bpo: 29512
.. date: 2018-05-30-00-39-57
.. nonce: EHrDzs
.. section: Tests

Rename Lib/test/bisect.py to Lib/test/bisect_cmd.py. The old name was in
conflict with Lib/bisect.py, causing test failures, depending how tests were
run.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-05-10-16-59-15
.. nonce: S-rcIN
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_gdb when Python is compiled with flags -mcet -fcf-protection -O0.

..

.. bpo: 33354
.. date: 2018-04-26-22-39-17
.. nonce: g35-44
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_ssl.test_load_dh_params`` when Python filesystem encoding cannot
encode the provided path.

..

.. bpo: 19417
.. date: 2018-01-08-13-33-47
.. nonce: 2asoXy
.. section: Tests

Add test_bdb.py.

..

.. bpo: 35139
.. date: 2018-11-01-15-01-23
.. nonce: XZTttb
.. section: Build

Fix a compiler error when statically linking `pyexpat` in `Modules/Setup`.

..

.. bpo: 34710
.. date: 2018-09-17-13-56-12
.. nonce: ARqIAK
.. section: Build

Fixed SSL module build with OpenSSL & pedantic CFLAGS.

..

.. bpo: 33015
.. date: 2018-08-24-09-48-25
.. nonce: s21y74
.. section: Build

Fix an undefined behaviour in the pthread implementation of
:c:func:`PyThread_start_new_thread`: add a function wrapper to always return
``NULL``.

..

.. bpo: 30345
.. date: 2018-06-15-18-18-16
.. nonce: j-xRE1
.. section: Build

Add -g to LDFLAGS when compiling with LTO to get debug symbols.

..

.. bpo: 35401
.. date: 2018-12-10-15-01-13
.. nonce: 9L1onG
.. section: Windows

Updates Windows build to OpenSSL 1.0.2q

..

.. bpo: 34603
.. date: 2018-09-13-08-29-04
.. nonce: 2AB7sc
.. section: Windows

Fix returning structs from functions produced by MSVC

..

.. bpo: 33711
.. date: 2018-06-24-12-09-23
.. nonce: LpO0s1
.. section: Windows

Fixed licence generation error when building the installer.

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 2018-12-11-02-50-35
.. nonce: 6tnyd2
.. section: macOS

The macOS 10.6+ installer now provides a private copy of Tcl/Tk 8.6, like
the 10.9+ installer does.

..

.. bpo: 35401
.. date: 2018-12-10-02-37-11
.. nonce: sFhD5z
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 1.0.2q.

..

.. bpo: 34405
.. date: 2018-09-11-08-47-50
.. nonce: f1-fT5
.. section: macOS

Update to OpenSSL 1.0.2p for macOS installer builds.

..

.. bpo: 34275
.. date: 2018-08-02-22-16-42
.. nonce: Iu0d7t
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE calltips always visible on Mac. Some MacOS-tk combinations need
.update_idletasks(). Patch by Kevin Walzer.

..

.. bpo: 34120
.. date: 2018-08-01-23-25-38
.. nonce: HgsIz-
.. section: IDLE

Fix unresponsiveness after closing certain windows and dialogs.

..

.. bpo: 33856
.. date: 2018-06-16-21-54-45
.. nonce: TH8WHU
.. section: IDLE

Add "help" in the welcome message of IDLE

..

.. bpo: 31500
.. date: 2017-09-18-10-43-03
.. nonce: Y_YDxA
.. section: IDLE

Default fonts now are scaled on HiDPI displays.

..

.. bpo: 34989
.. date: 2018-10-15-13-22-28
.. nonce: hU4fra
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb.py now handles errors on computing the line number of a Python
frame.

..

.. bpo: 34500
.. date: 2018-08-25-17-13-24
.. nonce: Edz41x
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix 2 ResourceWarning in difflib.py. Patch by Mickaël Schoentgen.

..

.. bpo: 29367
.. date: 2018-06-15-23-07-50
.. nonce: 52w9Uq
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb.py now supports also method-wrapper (wrapperobject) objects.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-06-14-16-23-07
.. nonce: Q3Dwns
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb now catchs ``UnicodeDecodeError`` exceptions when calling
``string()``.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-06-14-16-16-53
.. nonce: 2YfdwI
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb now catchs ValueError on read_var(): when Python has no debug
symbols for example.

..

.. bpo: 33817
.. date: 2019-01-11-11-16-36
.. nonce: qyYxjw
.. section: C API

Fixed :c:func:`_PyString_Resize` and :c:func:`_PyUnicode_Resize` for empty
strings. This fixed also :c:func:`PyString_FromFormat` and
:c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat` when they return an empty string (e.g.
``PyString_FromFormat("%s", "")``).

..

.. bpo: 34229
.. date: 2018-07-26-12-24-29
.. nonce: SupCZK
.. section: C API

Check start and stop of slice object to be long when they are not int in
:c:func:`PySlice_GetIndices`.

..

.. bpo: 23927
.. date: 2018-07-09-11-39-54
.. nonce: pDFkxb
.. section: C API

Fixed :exc:`SystemError` in :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords` when the
``w*`` format unit is used for optional parameter.
