.. bpo: 21963
.. date: 9487
.. nonce: eUwKx1
.. release date: 2014-11-25
.. section: Core and Builtins

backout issue #1856 patch (avoid crashes and lockups when daemon threads run
while the interpreter is shutting down; instead, these threads are now
killed when they try to take the GIL), as it seems to break some existing
code.

..

.. bpo: 22604
.. date: 9486
.. nonce: yii-It
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix assertion error in debug mode when dividing a complex number by
(nan+0j).

..

.. bpo: 22470
.. date: 9485
.. nonce: Lc7ZPK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed integer overflow issues in "backslashreplace" and "xmlcharrefreplace"
error handlers.

..

.. bpo: 22526
.. date: 9484
.. nonce: Oc9lar
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix iterating through files with lines longer than 2^31 bytes.

..

.. bpo: 22519
.. date: 9483
.. nonce: zTlQLy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking in PyString_Repr.

..

.. bpo: 22518
.. date: 9482
.. nonce: C9T6ed
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow issues in latin-1 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 22379
.. date: 9481
.. nonce: 4_3Ge-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix empty exception message in a TypeError raised in ``str.join``.

..

.. bpo: 22221
.. date: 9480
.. nonce: t0BE8h
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now the source encoding declaration on the second line isn't effective if
the first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 22023
.. date: 9479
.. nonce: id5Xei
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``%S``, ``%R`` and ``%V`` formats of :c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat`.

..

.. bpo: 21591
.. date: 9478
.. nonce: hJVYlf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly handle qualified exec statements in tuple form by moving
compatibility layer from run-time to AST transformation.

..

.. bpo: 22417
.. date: 9477
.. nonce: To4b7U
.. section: Library

Verify certificates by default in httplib (PEP 476).

..

.. bpo: 22927
.. date: 9476
.. nonce: TKaKOP
.. section: Library

Allow urllib.urlopen to take a *context* parameter to control SSL settings
for HTTPS connections.

..

.. bpo: 22921
.. date: 9475
.. nonce: a4wx1C
.. section: Library

Allow SSLContext to take the *hostname* parameter even if OpenSSL doesn't
support SNI.

..

.. bpo: 9003
.. date: 9474
.. nonce: VCncsy
.. section: Library

httplib.HTTPSConnection, urllib2.HTTPSHandler and urllib2.urlopen now take
optional arguments to allow for server certificate checking, as recommended
in public uses of HTTPS. This backport is part of PEP 467. (See also:
bpo-22366)

..

.. bpo: 12728
.. date: 9473
.. nonce: rHZmXO
.. section: Library

Different Unicode characters having the same uppercase but different
lowercase are now matched in case-insensitive regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22821
.. date: 9472
.. nonce: 30cQ-U
.. section: Library

Fixed fcntl() with integer argument on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 17293
.. date: 9471
.. nonce: Hk06bO
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() now determines MAC address on AIX using netstat. Based on
patch by Aivars Kalvāns.

..

.. bpo: 22769
.. date: 9470
.. nonce: PunnvQ
.. section: Library

Fixed ttk.Treeview.tag_has() when called without arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22787
.. date: 9469
.. nonce: QIzbnh
.. section: Library

Allow the keyfile argument of SSLContext.load_cert_chain to be None.

..

.. bpo: 22775
.. date: 9468
.. nonce: 9X-KKA
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickling of Cookie.SimpleCookie with protocol 2. Patch by Tim
Graham.

..

.. bpo: 22776
.. date: 9467
.. nonce: xNcRse
.. section: Library

Brought excluded code into the scope of a try block in SysLogHandler.emit().

..

.. bpo: 17381
.. date: 9466
.. nonce: IrcC9I
.. section: Library

Fixed ranges handling in case-insensitive regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 19329
.. date: 9465
.. nonce: f3o3tr
.. section: Library

Optimized compiling charsets in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22410
.. date: 9464
.. nonce: 99YFdd
.. section: Library

Module level functions in the re module now cache compiled locale-dependent
regular expressions taking into account the locale.

..

.. bpo: 8876
.. date: 9463
.. nonce: A83Av4
.. section: Library

distutils now falls back to copying files when hard linking doesn't work.
This allows use with special filesystems such as VirtualBox shared folders.

..

.. bpo: 9351
.. date: 9462
.. nonce: u5UI-6
.. section: Library

Defaults set with set_defaults on an argparse subparser are no longer
ignored when also set on the parent parser.

..

.. bpo: 20421
.. date: 9461
.. nonce: iR0S1s
.. section: Library

Add a .version() method to SSL sockets exposing the actual protocol version
in use.

..

.. bpo: 22435
.. date: 9460
.. nonce: Mrmeio
.. section: Library

Fix a file descriptor leak when SocketServer bind fails.

..

.. bpo: 13664
.. date: 9459
.. nonce: tjVs9o
.. section: Library

GzipFile now supports non-ascii Unicode filenames.

..

.. bpo: 13096
.. date: 9458
.. nonce: rsailB
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault in CTypes POINTER handling of large values.

..

.. bpo: 11694
.. date: 9457
.. nonce: JuDrch
.. section: Library

Raise ConversionError in xdrlib as documented.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński
and Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 1686
.. date: 9456
.. nonce: -w9zEU
.. section: Library

Fix string.Template when overriding the pattern attribute.

..

.. bpo: 11866
.. date: 9455
.. nonce: xrvbIC
.. section: Library

Eliminated race condition in the computation of names for new threads.

..

.. bpo: 22219
.. date: 9454
.. nonce: l9Enh9
.. section: Library

The zipfile module CLI now adds entries for directories (including empty
directories) in ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 22449
.. date: 9453
.. nonce: nFW_Fl
.. section: Library

In the ssl.SSLContext.load_default_certs, consult the environmental
variables SSL_CERT_DIR and SSL_CERT_FILE on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 8473
.. date: 9452
.. nonce: QcfDba
.. section: Library

doctest.testfile now uses universal newline mode to read the test file.

..

.. bpo: 20076
.. date: 9451
.. nonce: -7OIVB
.. section: Library

Added non derived UTF-8 aliases to locale aliases table.

..

.. bpo: 20079
.. date: 9450
.. nonce: qM949O
.. section: Library

Added locales supported in glibc 2.18 to locale alias table.

..

.. bpo: 22530
.. date: 9449
.. nonce: 4EcK4x
.. section: Library

Allow the ``group()`` method of regular expression match objects to take a
``long`` as an index.

..

.. bpo: 22517
.. date: 9448
.. nonce: qT6-aB
.. section: Library

When an io.BufferedRWPair object is deallocated, clear its weakrefs.

..

.. bpo: 10510
.. date: 9447
.. nonce: N-ntcD
.. section: Library

distutils register and upload methods now use HTML standards compliant CRLF
line endings.

..

.. bpo: 9850
.. date: 9446
.. nonce: D-UnVi
.. section: Library

Fixed macpath.join() for empty first component.  Patch by Oleg Oshmyan.

..

.. bpo: 20912
.. date: 9445
.. nonce: cAq3mZ
.. section: Library

Now directories added to ZIP file have correct Unix and MS-DOS directory
attributes.

..

.. bpo: 21866
.. date: 9444
.. nonce: hSc4wM
.. section: Library

ZipFile.close() no longer writes ZIP64 central directory records if
allowZip64 is false.

..

.. bpo: 22415
.. date: 9443
.. nonce: VKFghV
.. section: Library

Fixed debugging output of the GROUPREF_EXISTS opcode in the re module.

..

.. bpo: 22423
.. date: 9442
.. nonce: Rtb4oT
.. section: Library

Unhandled exception in thread no longer causes unhandled AttributeError when
sys.stderr is None.

..

.. bpo: 22419
.. date: 9441
.. nonce: FqH4aC
.. section: Library

Limit the length of incoming HTTP request in wsgiref server to 65536 bytes
and send a 414 error code for higher lengths. Patch contributed by Devin
Cook.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9440
.. nonce: y7r3O2
.. section: Library

Lax cookie parsing in http.cookies could be a security issue when combined
with non-standard cookie handling in some Web browsers.  Reported by Sergey
Bobrov.

..

.. bpo: 21147
.. date: 9439
.. nonce: w9DE17
.. section: Library

sqlite3 now raises an exception if the request contains a null character
instead of truncating it.  Based on patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 9438
.. nonce: 3vS4LK
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in Tkinter on AIX when called Tcl command with empty string or
tuple argument.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 9437
.. nonce: _CCC4v
.. section: Library

Tkinter now most likely raises MemoryError instead of crash if the memory
allocation fails.

..

.. bpo: 22226
.. date: 9436
.. nonce: T1ZMPY
.. section: Library

First letter no longer is stripped from the "status" key in the result of
Treeview.heading().

..

.. bpo: 22051
.. date: 9435
.. nonce: cUjFqL
.. section: Library

turtledemo no longer reloads examples to re-run them. Initialization of
variables and gui setup should be done in main(), which is called each time
a demo is run, but not on import.

..

.. bpo: 21597
.. date: 9434
.. nonce: aPTCWJ
.. section: Library

The separator between the turtledemo text pane and the drawing canvas can
now be grabbed and dragged with a mouse.  The code text pane can be widened
to easily view or copy the full width of the text.  The canvas can be
widened on small screens.  Original patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 18132
.. date: 9433
.. nonce: 2R2nwM
.. section: Library

Turtledemo buttons no longer disappear when the window is shrunk.  Original
patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 22312
.. date: 9432
.. nonce: WP13o8
.. section: Library

Fix ntpath.splitdrive IndexError.

..

.. bpo: 22216
.. date: 9431
.. nonce: Cmalu6
.. section: Library

smtplib now resets its state more completely after a quit.  The most obvious
consequence of the previous behavior was a STARTTLS failure during a
connect/starttls/quit/connect/starttls sequence.

..

.. bpo: 21305
.. date: 9430
.. nonce: Fl8I5B
.. section: Library

os.urandom now caches a fd to /dev/urandom. This is a PEP 466 backport from
Python 3.

..

.. bpo: 21307
.. date: 9429
.. nonce: U7iiqX
.. section: Library

As part of PEP 466, backport hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed and
hashlib.algorithms_available.

..

.. bpo: 22259
.. date: 9428
.. nonce: 6v9wLm
.. section: Library

Fix segfault when attempting to fopen a file descriptor corresponding to a
directory.

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 9427
.. nonce: 1utXkg
.. section: Library

Fixed Tkinter images copying operations in NoDefaultRoot mode.

..

.. bpo: 22191
.. date: 9426
.. nonce: 1K-CmD
.. section: Library

Fixed warnings.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 21308
.. date: 9425
.. nonce: _z9b8i
.. section: Library

Backport numerous features from Python's ssl module. This is part of PEP
466.

..

.. bpo: 15696
.. date: 9424
.. nonce: PTwXYJ
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for mmap objects on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 8797
.. date: 9423
.. nonce: aJcIPu
.. section: Library

Raise HTTPError on failed Basic Authentication immediately. Initial patch by
Sam Bull.

..

.. bpo: 22068
.. date: 9422
.. nonce: wCdaW0
.. section: Library

Avoided reference loops with Variables and Fonts in Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 21448
.. date: 9421
.. nonce: THJSYB
.. section: Library

Changed FeedParser feed() to avoid O(N**2) behavior when parsing long line.
Original patch by Raymond Hettinger.

..

.. bpo: 17923
.. date: 9420
.. nonce: YI_QjG
.. section: Library

glob() patterns ending with a slash no longer match non-dirs on AIX.  Based
on patch by Delhallt.

..

.. bpo: 21975
.. date: 9419
.. nonce: MI8ntO
.. section: Library

Fixed crash when using uninitialized sqlite3.Row (in particular when
unpickling pickled sqlite3.Row).  sqlite3.Row is now initialized in the
__new__() method.

..

.. bpo: 16037
.. date: 9418
.. nonce: q6A9-W
.. section: Library

HTTPMessage.readheaders() raises an HTTPException when more than 100 headers
are read. Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen and Daniel Eriksson.

..

.. bpo: 21580
.. date: 9417
.. nonce: BUIf7o
.. section: Library

Now Tkinter correctly handles binary "data" and "maskdata" configure options
of tkinter.PhotoImage.

..

.. bpo: 19612
.. date: 9416
.. nonce: xvU6AH
.. section: Library

subprocess.communicate() now also ignores EINVAL when using at least two
pipes.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9415
.. nonce: aDlT3j
.. section: Library

Fix repr(_socket.socket) on Windows 64-bit: don't fail with OverflowError on
closed socket.

..

.. bpo: 16133
.. date: 9414
.. nonce: 6cKWd2
.. section: Library

The asynchat.async_chat.handle_read() method now ignores socket.error()
exceptions with blocking I/O errors: EAGAIN, EALREADY, EINPROGRESS, or
EWOULDBLOCK.

..

.. bpo: 21990
.. date: 9413
.. nonce: _lujpf
.. section: Library

Clean-up unnecessary and slow inner class definition in saxutils
(Contributed by Alex Gaynor).

..

.. bpo: 1730136
.. date: 9412
.. nonce: sqWp2M
.. section: Library

Fix the comparison between a tkFont.Font and an object of another kind.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 9411
.. nonce: 6cbo0V
.. section: Library

readline: Disable the meta modifier key if stdout is not a terminal to not
write the ANSI sequence "\033[1034h" into stdout. This sequence is used on
some terminal (ex: TERM=xterm-256color") to enable support of 8 bit
characters.

..

.. bpo: 22017
.. date: 9410
.. nonce: BojGgr
.. section: Library

Correct reference counting error in the initialization of the _warnings
module.

..

.. bpo: 21868
.. date: 9409
.. nonce: q_ZIvF
.. section: Library

Prevent turtle crash when undo buffer set to a value less than one.

..

.. bpo: 21151
.. date: 9408
.. nonce: T7tb9Q
.. section: Library

Fixed a segfault in the _winreg module when ``None`` is passed as a
``REG_BINARY`` value to SetValueEx.  Patch by John Ehresman.

..

.. bpo: 21090
.. date: 9407
.. nonce: 20Ooif
.. section: Library

io.FileIO.readall() does not ignore I/O errors anymore. Before, it ignored
I/O errors if at least the first C call read() succeed.

..

.. bpo: 19870
.. date: 9406
.. nonce: 3QBvmj
.. section: Library

BaseCookie now parses 'secure' and 'httponly' flags. Backport of issue
#16611.

..

.. bpo: 21923
.. date: 9405
.. nonce: hXnoZa
.. section: Library

Prevent AttributeError in distutils.sysconfig.customize_compiler due to
possible uninitialized _config_vars.

..

.. bpo: 21323
.. date: 9404
.. nonce: yRf1v6
.. section: Library

Fix CGIHTTPServer to again handle scripts in CGI subdirectories, broken by
the fix for security issue #19435.  Patch by Zach Byrne.

..

.. bpo: 22199
.. date: 9403
.. nonce: SIwKds
.. section: Library

Make get_makefile_filename() available in Lib/sysconfig.py for 2.7 to match
other versions of sysconfig.

..

.. bpo: 3068
.. date: 9402
.. nonce: TYjXTA
.. section: IDLE

Add Idle extension configuration dialog to Options menu. Changes are written
to HOME/.idlerc/config-extensions.cfg. Original patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16233
.. date: 9401
.. nonce: sOadNo
.. section: IDLE

A module browser (File : Class Browser, Alt+C) requires an editor window
with a filename.  When Class Browser is requested otherwise, from a shell,
output window, or 'Untitled' editor, Idle no longer displays an error box.
It now pops up an Open Module box (Alt+M). If a valid name is entered and a
module is opened, a corresponding browser is also opened.

..

.. bpo: 4832
.. date: 9400
.. nonce: GRKi9M
.. section: IDLE

Save As to type Python files automatically adds .py to the name you enter
(even if your system does not display it).  Some systems automatically add
.txt when type is Text files.

..

.. bpo: 21986
.. date: 9399
.. nonce: 04GUv2
.. section: IDLE

Code objects are not normally pickled by the pickle module. To match this,
they are no longer pickled when running under Idle.

..

.. bpo: 22221
.. date: 9398
.. nonce: d87SuA
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now ignores the source encoding declaration on the second line if the
first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 9397
.. nonce: I4vHFh
.. section: IDLE

Adjust Editor window title; remove 'Python', move version to end.

..

.. bpo: 14105
.. date: 9396
.. nonce: -FZwYH
.. section: IDLE

Idle debugger breakpoints no longer disappear when inserting or deleting
lines.

..

.. bpo: 22381
.. date: 9395
.. nonce: 6ngdZW
.. section: Library

Update zlib to 1.2.8.

..

.. bpo: 22176
.. date: 9394
.. nonce: rgbRyg
.. section: Library

Update the ctypes module's libffi to v3.1.  This release adds support for
the Linux AArch64 and POWERPC ELF ABIv2 little endian architectures.

..

.. bpo: 10712
.. date: 9393
.. nonce: rnd0oc
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 has a new "asserts" fixer that replaces deprecated names of unittest
methods (e.g. failUnlessEqual -> assertEqual).

..

.. bpo: 22221
.. date: 9392
.. nonce: vONLqA
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now ignore the source encoding
declaration on the second line if the first line contains anything except a
comment.

..

.. bpo: 22201
.. date: 9391
.. nonce: k1Awbh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Command-line interface of the zipfile module now correctly extracts ZIP
files with directory entries.  Patch by Ryan Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 9390
.. nonce: ginJSI
.. section: Tests

Tkinter tests now don't reuse default root window.  New root window is
created for every test class.

..

.. bpo: 18004
.. date: 9389
.. nonce: jPXten
.. section: Tests

test_overflow in test_list by mistake consumed 40 GiB of memory on 64-bit
systems.

..

.. bpo: 21976
.. date: 9388
.. nonce: Slq6se
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl to accept LibreSSL version strings.  Thanks to William Orr.

..

.. bpo: 22770
.. date: 9387
.. nonce: FxAh91
.. section: Tests

Prevent some Tk segfaults on OS X when running gui tests.

..

.. bpo: 20221
.. date: 9386
.. nonce: _yAetK
.. section: Build

Removed conflicting (or circular) hypot definition when compiled with VS
2010 or above.  Initial patch by Tabrez Mohammed.

..

.. bpo: 16537
.. date: 9385
.. nonce: llFo71
.. section: Build

Check whether self.extensions is empty in setup.py. Patch by Jonathan
Hosmer.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9384
.. nonce: YZUllw
.. section: Build

The documentation Makefile no longer automatically downloads Sphinx. Users
are now required to have Sphinx already installed to build the
documentation.

..

.. bpo: 21958
.. date: 9383
.. nonce: 3rq4qR
.. section: Build

Define HAVE_ROUND when building with Visual Studio 2013 and above.  Patch by
Zachary Turner.

..

.. bpo: 15759
.. date: 9382
.. nonce: iGLR6O
.. section: Build

"make suspicious", "make linkcheck" and "make doctest" in Doc/ now display
special message when and only when there are failures.

..

.. bpo: 21166
.. date: 9381
.. nonce: KAl7aO
.. section: Build

Prevent possible segfaults and other random failures of python
``--generate-posix-vars`` in pybuilddir.txt build target.

..

.. bpo: 18096
.. date: 9380
.. nonce: ELyAUJ
.. section: Build

Fix library order returned by python-config.

..

.. bpo: 17219
.. date: 9379
.. nonce: q8ueQ0
.. section: Build

Add library build dir for Python extension cross-builds.

..

.. bpo: 22877
.. date: 9378
.. nonce: nq_snR
.. section: Build

PEP 477 - OS X installer now installs pip.

..

.. bpo: 22878
.. date: 9377
.. nonce: y4UnOy
.. section: Build

PEP 477 - "make install" and "make altinstall" can now install or upgrade
pip, using the bundled pip provided by the backported ensurepip module.  A
configure option, --with-ensurepip[=upgrade|install|no], is available to set
the option for subsequent installs; the default for Python 2 in "no" (do not
install or upgrade pip).  The option can also be set with "make [alt]install
ENSUREPIP=[upgrade|install|no]".

..

.. bpo: 17896
.. date: 9376
.. nonce: o79rHM
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now expect external library sources to be in
``PCbuild\..\externals`` rather than ``PCbuild\..\..``.

..

.. bpo: 17717
.. date: 9375
.. nonce: y1zoye
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now use a copy of NASM pulled from svn.python.org
to build OpenSSL.

..

.. bpo: 22644
.. date: 9374
.. nonce: gosBki
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1j.
