.. bpo: 5322
.. date: 9925
.. nonce: 8Fq059
.. release date: 2016-12-03
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed setting __new__ to a PyCFunction inside Python code. Original patch by
Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 28847
.. date: 9924
.. nonce: iG6VRD
.. section: Core and Builtins

dumbdbm no longer writes the index file in when it is not changed and
supports reading read-only files.

..

.. bpo: 11145
.. date: 9923
.. nonce: 3BeZaz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed miscellaneous issues with C-style formatting of types with custom
__oct__ and __hex__.

..

.. bpo: 24469
.. date: 9922
.. nonce: dl8lJ4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed memory leak caused by int subclasses without overridden tp_free (e.g.
C-inherited Cython classes).

..

.. bpo: 19398
.. date: 9921
.. nonce: RYbEGH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extra slash no longer added to sys.path components in case of empty
compile-time PYTHONPATH components.

..

.. bpo: 21720
.. date: 9920
.. nonce: XSd6LI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve exception message when the type of fromlist is unicode. fromlist
parameter of __import__() only accepts str in Python 2 and this will help to
identify the problem especially when the unicode_literals future import is
used.

..

.. bpo: 26906
.. date: 9919
.. nonce: YBjcwI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Resolving special methods of uninitialized type now causes implicit
initialization of the type instead of a fail.

..

.. bpo: 18287
.. date: 9918
.. nonce: k6jffS
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyType_Ready() now checks that tp_name is not NULL. Original patch by Niklas
Koep.

..

.. bpo: 24098
.. date: 9917
.. nonce: XqlP_1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible crash when AST is changed in process of compiling it.

..

.. bpo: 28350
.. date: 9916
.. nonce: 8M5Eg9
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants with null character no longer interned.

..

.. bpo: 27942
.. date: 9915
.. nonce: ZGuhns
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants now interned recursively in tuples and frozensets.

..

.. bpo: 15578
.. date: 9914
.. nonce: xSQWiu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly incref the parent module while importing.

..

.. bpo: 26307
.. date: 9913
.. nonce: Puk2rd
.. section: Core and Builtins

The profile-opt build now applies PGO to the built-in modules.

..

.. bpo: 26020
.. date: 9912
.. nonce: niLbLa
.. section: Core and Builtins

set literal evaluation order did not match documented behaviour.

..

.. bpo: 27870
.. date: 9911
.. nonce: Y0u34u
.. section: Core and Builtins

A left shift of zero by a large integer no longer attempts to allocate large
amounts of memory.

..

.. bpo: 25604
.. date: 9910
.. nonce: UkeHGy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a minor bug in integer true division; this bug could potentially have
caused off-by-one-ulp results on platforms with unreliable ldexp
implementations.

..

.. bpo: 27473
.. date: 9909
.. nonce: d8HWze
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible integer overflow in str, unicode and bytearray concatenations
and repetitions.  Based on patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27507
.. date: 9908
.. nonce: 3pX0Be
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add integer overflow check in bytearray.extend().  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27581
.. date: 9907
.. nonce: KezjNt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't rely on wrapping for overflow check in PySequence_Tuple().  Patch by
Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 23908
.. date: 9906
.. nonce: xXL6_c
.. section: Core and Builtins

os functions, open() and the io.FileIO constructor now reject unicode paths
with embedded null character on Windows instead of silently truncating them.

..

.. bpo: 27514
.. date: 9905
.. nonce: NLbwPG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make having too many statically nested blocks a SyntaxError instead of
SystemError.

..

.. bpo: 25659
.. date: 9904
.. nonce: lE2IlT
.. section: Library

In ctypes, prevent a crash calling the from_buffer() and from_buffer_copy()
methods on abstract classes like Array.

..

.. bpo: 28563
.. date: 9903
.. nonce: iweEiw
.. section: Library

Fixed possible DoS and arbitrary code execution when handle plural form
selections in the gettext module.  The expression parser now supports exact
syntax supported by GNU gettext.

..

.. bpo: 28387
.. date: 9902
.. nonce: 1clJu7
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crash in _io.TextIOWrapper deallocator when the garbage
collector is invoked in other thread.  Based on patch by Sebastian Cufre.

..

.. bpo: 28449
.. date: 9901
.. nonce: 5JK6ES
.. section: Library

tarfile.open() with mode "r" or "r:" now tries to open a tar file with
compression before trying to open it without compression.  Otherwise it had
50% chance failed with ignore_zeros=True.

..

.. bpo: 25464
.. date: 9900
.. nonce: DTGbbr
.. section: Library

Fixed HList.header_exists() in Tix module by adding a workaround to Tix
library bug.

..

.. bpo: 28488
.. date: 9899
.. nonce: TgO112
.. section: Library

shutil.make_archive() no longer adds entry "./" to ZIP archive.

..

.. bpo: 28480
.. date: 9898
.. nonce: Qh4Xeq
.. section: Library

Fix error building _sqlite3 module when multithreading is disabled.

..

.. bpo: 24452
.. date: 9897
.. nonce: m9Kyg3
.. section: Library

Make webbrowser support Chrome on Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 26293
.. date: 9896
.. nonce: 2mjvwX
.. section: Library

Fixed writing ZIP files that starts not from the start of the file.  Offsets
in ZIP file now are relative to the start of the archive in conforming to
the specification.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9895
.. nonce: 81jNns
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflows and crashes in the mmap module with unusual
usage patterns.

..

.. bpo: 27897
.. date: 9894
.. nonce: wfWe9B
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crash in sqlite3.Connection.create_collation() if pass
invalid string-like object as a name.  Original patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 1703178
.. date: 9893
.. nonce: meb49K
.. section: Library

Fix the ability to pass the --link-objects option to the distutils build_ext
command.

..

.. bpo: 28253
.. date: 9892
.. nonce: aLfmhe
.. section: Library

Fixed calendar functions for extreme months: 0001-01 and 9999-12.

Methods itermonthdays() and itermonthdays2() are reimplemented so that they
don't call itermonthdates() which can cause datetime.date under/overflow.

..

.. bpo: 27963
.. date: 9891
.. nonce: XDgr3L
.. section: Library

Fixed possible null pointer dereference in ctypes.set_conversion_mode().
Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 28284
.. date: 9890
.. nonce: kHbh7e
.. section: Library

Strengthen resistance of ``_json.encode_basestring_ascii()`` to integer
overflow.

..

.. bpo: 27611
.. date: 9889
.. nonce: yfOkD6
.. section: Library

Fixed support of default root window in the Tix module.

..

.. bpo: 24363
.. date: 9888
.. nonce: PVQg7r
.. section: Library

When parsing HTTP header fields, if an invalid line is encountered, skip it
and continue parsing.  Previously, no more header fields were parsed, which
could lead to fields for HTTP framing like Content-Length and
Transfer-Encoding being overlooked.

..

.. bpo: 27599
.. date: 9887
.. nonce: itvm8T
.. section: Library

Fixed buffer overrun in binascii.b2a_qp() and binascii.a2b_qp().

..

.. bpo: 25969
.. date: 9886
.. nonce: qSPkl-
.. section: Library

Update the lib2to3 grammar to handle the unpacking generalizations added in
3.5.

..

.. bpo: 24594
.. date: 9885
.. nonce: 9CnFVS
.. section: Library

Validates persist parameter when opening MSI database

..

.. bpo: 27570
.. date: 9884
.. nonce: pU0Zie
.. section: Library

Avoid zero-length memcpy() etc calls with null source pointers in the
"ctypes" and "array" modules.

..

.. bpo: 22450
.. date: 9883
.. nonce: aWpdde
.. section: Library

urllib now includes an "Accept: */*" header among the default headers.  This
makes the results of REST API requests more consistent and predictable
especially when proxy servers are involved.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9882
.. nonce: PVZStR
.. section: Library

lib2to3.pgen3.driver.load_grammar() now creates a stable cache file between
runs given the same Grammar.txt input regardless of the hash randomization
setting.

..

.. bpo: 27691
.. date: 9881
.. nonce: TMYF5_
.. section: Library

Fix ssl module's parsing of GEN_RID subject alternative name fields in X.509
certs.

..

.. bpo: 27850
.. date: 9880
.. nonce: kIVQ0m
.. section: Library

Remove 3DES from ssl module's default cipher list to counter measure sweet32
attack (CVE-2016-2183).

..

.. bpo: 27766
.. date: 9879
.. nonce: WI70Tc
.. section: Library

Add ChaCha20 Poly1305 to ssl module's default ciper list. (Required OpenSSL
1.1.0 or LibreSSL).

..

.. bpo: 26470
.. date: 9878
.. nonce: QGu_wo
.. section: Library

Port ssl and hashlib module to OpenSSL 1.1.0.

..

.. bpo: 27944
.. date: 9877
.. nonce: EVXdfk
.. section: Library

Fix some memory-corruption bugs in the log reading code of the _hotshot
module.

..

.. bpo: 27934
.. date: 9876
.. nonce: ucQE3p
.. section: Library

Use ``float.__repr__`` instead of plain ``repr`` when JSON- encoding an
instance of a float subclass. Thanks Eddie James.

..

.. bpo: 27861
.. date: 9875
.. nonce: DBYuo9
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in sqlite3.Connection.cursor() when a factory creates not a
cursor.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 9874
.. nonce: MO8AWH
.. section: Library

Avoid spurious output on OS X with Gnu Readline.

..

.. bpo: 10513
.. date: 9873
.. nonce: tQIQD_
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in Connection.commit().  Statements should not be reset
after a commit.

..

.. bpo: 2466
.. date: 9872
.. nonce: VRNlkg
.. section: Library

posixpath.ismount now correctly recognizes mount points which the user does
not have permission to access.

..

.. bpo: 27783
.. date: 9871
.. nonce: 6fCCY9
.. section: Library

Fix possible usage of uninitialized memory in operator.methodcaller.

..

.. bpo: 27774
.. date: 9870
.. nonce: FDcik1
.. section: Library

Fix possible Py_DECREF on unowned object in _sre.

..

.. bpo: 27760
.. date: 9869
.. nonce: gxMjp4
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in binascii.b2a_qp.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9868
.. nonce: Ny9oPv
.. section: Library

In the curses module, raise an error if window.getstr() or window.instr() is
passed a negative value.

..

.. bpo: 27758
.. date: 9867
.. nonce: x9DC4R
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in the _csv module for large record lengths.

..

.. bpo: 23369
.. date: 9866
.. nonce: nqChyE
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in _json.encode_basestring_ascii.

..

.. bpo: 27568
.. date: 9865
.. nonce: OnuO9s
.. section: Library

Prevent HTTPoxy attack (CVE-2016-1000110). Ignore the HTTP_PROXY variable
when REQUEST_METHOD environment is set, which indicates that the script is
in CGI mode.

..

.. bpo: 27130
.. date: 9864
.. nonce: zVvNDt
.. section: Library

In the "zlib" module, fix handling of large buffers (typically 2 or 4 GiB).
Previously, inputs were limited to 2 GiB, and compression and decompression
operations did not properly handle results of 2 or 4 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 23804
.. date: 9863
.. nonce: ipFvxc
.. section: Library

Fix SSL zero-length recv() calls to not block and not raise an error about
unclean EOF.

..

.. bpo: 27466
.. date: 9862
.. nonce: C_3a8E
.. section: Library

Change time format returned by http.cookie.time2netscape, confirming the
netscape cookie format and making it consistent with documentation.

..

.. bpo: 22115
.. date: 9861
.. nonce: Vpj2aH
.. section: Library

Fixed tracing Tkinter variables: trace_vdelete() with wrong mode no longer
break tracing, trace_vinfo() now always returns a list of pairs of strings.

..

.. bpo: 27079
.. date: 9860
.. nonce: c7d0Ym
.. section: Library

Fixed curses.ascii functions isblank(), iscntrl() and ispunct().

..

.. bpo: 22636
.. date: 9859
.. nonce: 3fQW_g
.. section: Library

Avoid shell injection problems with ctypes.util.find_library().

..

.. bpo: 27330
.. date: 9858
.. nonce: GJaFCV
.. section: Library

Fixed possible leaks in the ctypes module.

..

.. bpo: 27238
.. date: 9857
.. nonce: Q6v6Qv
.. section: Library

Got rid of bare excepts in the turtle module.  Original patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. bpo: 26386
.. date: 9856
.. nonce: 9L3Ut4
.. section: Library

Fixed ttk.TreeView selection operations with item id's containing spaces.

..

.. bpo: 25455
.. date: 9855
.. nonce: tj_49f
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in repr of cElementTree.Element with recursive tag.

..

.. bpo: 21201
.. date: 9854
.. nonce: wLCKiA
.. section: Library

Improves readability of multiprocessing error message.  Thanks to Wojciech
Walczak for patch.

..

.. bpo: 27854
.. date: 9853
.. nonce: 8L_TJb
.. section: IDLE

Make Help => IDLE Help work again on Windows. Include idlelib/help.html in
2.7 Windows installer.

..

.. bpo: 25507
.. date: 9852
.. nonce: bQVsMZ
.. section: IDLE

Add back import needed for 2.x encoding warning box. Add pointer to
'Encoding declaration' in Language Reference.

..

.. bpo: 15308
.. date: 9851
.. nonce: zZxn8m
.. section: IDLE

Add 'interrupt execution' (^C) to Shell menu. Patch by Roger Serwy, updated
by Bayard Randel.

..

.. bpo: 27922
.. date: 9850
.. nonce: UEtEv9
.. section: IDLE

Stop IDLE tests from 'flashing' gui widgets on the screen.

..

.. bpo: 17642
.. date: 9849
.. nonce: B0BNOB
.. section: IDLE

add larger font sizes for classroom projection.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9848
.. nonce: zWZs6o
.. section: IDLE

Add version to title of IDLE help window.

..

.. bpo: 25564
.. date: 9847
.. nonce: GN0p14
.. section: IDLE

In section on IDLE -- console differences, mention that using exec means
that __builtins__ is defined for each statement.

..

.. bpo: 27714
.. date: 9846
.. nonce: bUEDsI
.. section: IDLE

text_textview and test_autocomplete now pass when re-run in the same
process.  This occurs when test_idle fails when run with the -w option but
without -jn.  Fix warning from test_config.

..

.. bpo: 27452
.. date: 9845
.. nonce: RtWnyR
.. section: IDLE

add line counter and crc to IDLE configHandler test dump.

..

.. bpo: 27365
.. date: 9844
.. nonce: y7ys_A
.. section: IDLE

Allow non-ascii chars in IDLE NEWS.txt, for contributor names.

..

.. bpo: 27245
.. date: 9843
.. nonce: u9aKO1
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: Cleanly delete custom themes and key bindings. Previously, when IDLE
was started from a console or by import, a cascade of warnings was emitted.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 28513
.. date: 9842
.. nonce: L3joAz
.. section: Documentation

Documented command-line interface of zipfile.

..

.. bpo: 16484
.. date: 9841
.. nonce: ITzcGg
.. section: Documentation

Change the default PYTHONDOCS URL to "https:", and fix the resulting links
to use lowercase.  Patch by Sean Rodman, test by Kaushik Nadikuditi.

..

.. bpo: 28666
.. date: 9840
.. nonce: sbGV2K
.. section: Tests

Now test.test_support.rmtree is able to remove unwritable or unreadable
directories.

..

.. bpo: 23839
.. date: 9839
.. nonce: zsT_L9
.. section: Tests

Various caches now are cleared before running every test file.

..

.. bpo: 27369
.. date: 9838
.. nonce: LG7U2D
.. section: Tests

In test_pyexpat, avoid testing an error message detail that changed in Expat
2.2.0.

..

.. bpo: 10656
.. date: 9837
.. nonce: pR8FFU
.. section: Build

Fix out-of-tree building on AIX.  Patch by Tristan Carel and Michael
Haubenwallner.

..

.. bpo: 26359
.. date: 9836
.. nonce: CLz6qy
.. section: Build

Rename --with-optimiations to --enable-optimizations.

..

.. bpo: 28248
.. date: 9835
.. nonce: KY_-en
.. section: Build

Update Windows build and OS X installers to use OpenSSL 1.0.2j.

..

.. bpo: 28258
.. date: 9834
.. nonce: pQNUId
.. section: Build

Fixed build with Estonian locale (distclean target in Makefile).  Patch by
Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 26661
.. date: 9833
.. nonce: Z_HNbs
.. section: Build

setup.py now detects system libffi with multiarch wrapper.

..

.. bpo: 15819
.. date: 9832
.. nonce: Wi3naX
.. section: Build

The Include directory in the build tree is already searched; drop unused
code trying to add it again.

..

.. bpo: 27566
.. date: 9831
.. nonce: xDWjEb
.. section: Build

Fix clean target in freeze makefile (patch by Lisa Roach)

..

.. bpo: 27983
.. date: 9830
.. nonce: jL_1n8
.. section: Build

Cause lack of llvm-profdata tool when using clang as required for PGO
linking to be a configure time error rather than make time when
``--with-optimizations`` is enabled.  Also improve our ability to find the
llvm-profdata tool on MacOS and some Linuxes.

..

.. bpo: 26359
.. date: 9829
.. nonce: WXBL-Y
.. section: Build

Add the --with-optimizations configure flag.

..

.. bpo: 10910
.. date: 9828
.. nonce: ZdRayb
.. section: Build

Avoid C++ compilation errors on FreeBSD and OS X. Also update FreedBSD
version checks for the original ctype UTF-8 workaround.

..

.. bpo: 27806
.. date: 9827
.. nonce: DEhPsm
.. section: Build

Fix 32-bit builds on macOS Sierra 10.12 broken by removal of deprecated
QuickTime/QuickTime.h header file.  Patch by Aleks Bunin.

..

.. bpo: 28676
.. date: 9826
.. nonce: 41PL3Q
.. section: Build

Prevent missing 'getentropy' declaration warning on macOS. Initial patch by
Gareth Rees.

..

.. bpo: 27952
.. date: 9825
.. nonce: OO-hBo
.. section: Tools/Demos

Get Tools/scripts/fixcid.py working with the current "re" module, avoid
invalid Python backslash escapes, and fix a bug parsing escaped C quote
signs.

..

.. bpo: 27932
.. date: 9824
.. nonce: mtgl-6
.. section: Windows

Prevent memory leak in win32_ver().

..

.. bpo: 27888
.. date: 9823
.. nonce: xClILd
.. section: Windows

Prevent Windows installer from displaying console windows and failing when
pip cannot be installed/uninstalled.

..

.. bpo: 28440
.. date: 9822
.. nonce: KBMmDg
.. section: macOS

No longer add /Library/Python/site-packages, the Apple-supplied system
Python site-packages directory, to sys.path for macOS framework builds. The
coupling between the two Python instances often caused confusion and, as of
macOS 10.12, changes to the site-packages layout can cause pip component
installations to fail.  This change reverts the effects introduced in 2.7.0
by Issue #4865.  If you are using a package with both the Apple system
Python 2.7 and a user-installed Python 2.7, you will need to ensure that
copies of the package are installed with both Python instances.
