.. bpo: 7544
.. date: 7892
.. nonce: TTDd8s
.. release date: 2010-03-06
.. section: Core and Builtins

Preallocate thread memory before creating the thread to avoid a fatal error
in low memory condition.

..

.. bpo: 7820
.. date: 7891
.. nonce: hEaQ9f
.. section: Core and Builtins

The parser tokenizer restores all bytes in the right if the BOM check fails.

..

.. bpo: 7309
.. date: 7890
.. nonce: pAF_KB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix unchecked attribute access when converting UnicodeEncodeError,
UnicodeDecodeError, and UnicodeTranslateError to strings.

..

.. bpo: 7649
.. date: 7889
.. nonce: KS0hoy
.. section: Core and Builtins

"u'%c' % char" now behaves like "u'%s' % char" and raises a
UnicodeDecodeError if 'char' is a byte string that can't be decoded using
the default encoding.

..

.. bpo: 6902
.. date: 7888
.. nonce: RDRX1R
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix problem with built-in types format incorrectly with 0 padding.

..

.. bpo: 2560
.. date: 7887
.. nonce: kdK-75
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove an unnecessary 'for' loop from ``my_fgets()`` in Parser/myreadline.c.

..

.. bpo: 7988
.. date: 7886
.. nonce: 9h758B
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix default alignment to be right aligned for ``complex.__format__``.  Now
it matches other numeric types.

..

.. bpo: 5211
.. date: 7885
.. nonce: bktLaF
.. section: Core and Builtins

The complex type no longer uses implicit coercion in mixed-type binary
arithmetic operations.

..

.. bpo: 7904
.. date: 7884
.. nonce: fiQRfj
.. section: Library

Changes to urllib.parse.urlsplit to handle schemes as defined by RFC3986.
Anything before :// is considered a scheme and is followed by an authority
(or netloc) and by '/' led path, which is optional.

..

.. bpo: 1555570
.. date: 7883
.. nonce: ruR9CS
.. section: Library

email no longer inserts extra blank lines when a \r\n combo crosses an 8192
byte boundary.

..

.. bpo: 6906
.. date: 7882
.. nonce: BJTdHl
.. section: Library

Tk should not set Unicode environment variables on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 1054943
.. date: 7881
.. nonce: uHWve2
.. section: Library

Fix ``unicodedata.normalize('NFC', text)`` for the Public Review Issue #29
(http://unicode.org/review/pr-29.html).

..

.. bpo: 7494
.. date: 7880
.. nonce: ZnUIo2
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in ``_lsprof`` (cProfile) after clearing the profiler, reset
also the pointer to the current pointer context.

..

.. bpo: 7232
.. date: 7879
.. nonce: dD983K
.. section: Library

Add support for the context management protocol to the ``tarfile.TarFile``
class.

..

.. bpo: 7250
.. date: 7878
.. nonce: SqXm2h
.. section: Library

Fix info leak of os.environ across multi-run uses of
``wsgiref.handlers.CGIHandler``.

..

.. bpo: 1729305
.. date: 7877
.. nonce: pRiKEW
.. section: Library

Fix doctest to handle encode error with "backslashreplace".

..

.. bpo: 691291
.. date: 7876
.. nonce: SkVfbl
.. section: Library

``codecs.open()`` should not convert end of lines on reading and writing.

..

.. bpo: 7975
.. date: 7875
.. nonce: lm8Hlp
.. section: Library

Correct regression in dict methods supported by bsddb.dbshelve.

..

.. bpo: 7959
.. date: 7874
.. nonce: 0Si0xg
.. section: Library

ctypes callback functions are now registered correctly with the cycle
garbage collector.

..

.. bpo: 7970
.. date: 7873
.. nonce: zsdvhZ
.. section: Library

``email.Generator.flatten`` now correctly flattens message/rfc822 messages
parsed by ``email.Parser.HeaderParser``.

..

.. bpo: 3426
.. date: 7872
.. nonce: bunX9f
.. section: Library

``os.path.abspath`` now returns unicode when its arg is unicode.

..

.. bpo: 7633
.. date: 7871
.. nonce: kpPZYL
.. section: Library

In the decimal module, ``Context`` class methods (with the exception of
canonical and is_canonical) now accept instances of int and long wherever a
Decimal instance is accepted, and implicitly convert that argument to
Decimal.  Previously only some arguments were converted.

..

.. bpo: 6003
.. date: 7870
.. nonce: TAoZ-e
.. section: Library

Add an argument to ``zipfile.Zipfile.writestr`` to specify the compression
type.

..

.. bpo: 7893
.. date: 7869
.. nonce: IFB3BV
.. section: Library

``unittest.TextTestResult`` is made public and a ``resultclass`` argument
added to the TextTestRunner constructor allowing a different result class to
be used without having to subclass.

..

.. bpo: 7588
.. date: 7868
.. nonce: rOCPeT
.. section: Library

``unittest.TextTestResult.getDescription`` now includes the test name in
failure reports even if the test has a docstring.

..

.. bpo: 5801
.. date: 7867
.. nonce: eOropo
.. section: Library

Remove spurious empty lines in wsgiref.

..

.. bpo: 1537721
.. date: 7866
.. nonce: cM7u3p
.. section: Library

Add a ``writeheader()`` method to ``csv.DictWriter``.

..

.. bpo: 7427
.. date: 7865
.. nonce: c1z170
.. section: Library

Improve the representation of httplib.BadStatusLine exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 7481
.. date: 7864
.. nonce: FOM-ZK
.. section: Library

When a ``threading.Thread`` failed to start it would leave the instance
stuck in initial state and present in ``threading.enumerate()``.

..

.. bpo: 1068268
.. date: 7863
.. nonce: GTy8EE
.. section: Library

The subprocess module now handles EINTR in internal ``os.waitpid()`` and
``os.read()`` system calls where appropriate.

..

.. bpo: 6729
.. date: 7862
.. nonce: WSzBED
.. section: Library

Add ``ctypes.c_ssize_t`` to represent ssize_t.

..

.. bpo: 6247
.. date: 7861
.. nonce: qqe0rR
.. section: Library

The argparse module has been added to the standard library.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7860
.. nonce: sY1Wyi
.. section: Library

The sqlite3 module was updated to pysqlite 2.6.0.  This fixes several
obscure bugs and allows loading SQLite extensions from shared libraries.

..

.. bpo: 7808
.. date: 7859
.. nonce: Onia6y
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in _bsddb and related tests.

..

.. bpo: 6544
.. date: 7858
.. nonce: NLvwqS
.. section: Library

Fix a reference leak in the kqueue implementation's error handling.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7857
.. nonce: yVX0tF
.. section: Library

Stop providing crtassem.h symbols when compiling with Visual Studio 2010, as
msvcr100.dll is not a platform assembly anymore.

..

.. bpo: 7242
.. date: 7856
.. nonce: VzdbKI
.. section: Library

On Solaris 9 and earlier calling ``os.fork()`` from within a thread could
raise an incorrect RuntimeError about not holding the import lock.  The
import lock is now reinitialized after fork.

..

.. bpo: 7999
.. date: 7855
.. nonce: -6kN7B
.. section: Library

``os.setreuid()`` and ``os.setregid()`` would refuse to accept a -1
parameter on some platforms such as OS X.

..

.. bpo: 7849
.. date: 7854
.. nonce: XQLva6
.. section: Tests

The utility ``test.test_support.check_warnings()`` verifies if warnings are
effectively raised.  A new utility ``check_py3k_warnings()`` is available.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7853
.. nonce: iFGi5W
.. section: Tests

The four path modules (genericpath, macpath, ntpath, posixpath) share a
common TestCase for some tests: test_genericpath.CommonTest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7852
.. nonce: xd6x8Q
.. section: Tests

Print platform information when running the whole test suite, or using the
``--verbose`` flag.

..

.. bpo: 767675
.. date: 7851
.. nonce: cR-mRY
.. section: Tests

Enable test_pep277 on POSIX platforms with Unicode-friendly filesystem
encoding.

..

.. bpo: 6292
.. date: 7850
.. nonce: RJOYAi
.. section: Tests

For the moment at least, the test suite runs cleanly if python is run with
the -OO flag.  Tests requiring docstrings are skipped.

..

.. bpo: 7712
.. date: 7849
.. nonce: Co5Xm7
.. section: Tests

test_support gained a new ``temp_cwd`` context manager which is now also
used by regrtest to run all the tests in a temporary directory.  The
original CWD is saved in ``test.test_support.SAVEDCWD``.  Thanks to Florent
Xicluna who helped with the patch.

..

.. bpo: 3920
.. date: 7848
.. nonce: 5cWPGY
.. section: Build

Define _BSD_SOURCE on OpenBSD 4.4 through 4.9. (See also: bpo-7903)
