.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7804
.. nonce: jherxT
.. release date: 2010-01-09
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ``__complex__()`` method is now looked up on the class of instances to
make it consistent with other special methods.

..

.. bpo: 7462
.. date: 7803
.. nonce: E1r1bi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement the stringlib fast search algorithm for the `rfind`, `rindex`,
`rsplit` and `rpartition` methods.  Patch by Florent Xicluna.

..

.. bpo: 5080
.. date: 7802
.. nonce: Wb4q9j
.. section: Core and Builtins

A number of functions and methods previously produced a DeprecationWarning
when passed a float argument where an integer was expected. These functions
and methods now raise TypeError instead.  The majority of the effects of
this change are in the extension modules, but some core functions and
methods are affected: notably the 'chr', 'range' and 'xrange' builtins, and
many unicode/str methods.

..

.. bpo: 7604
.. date: 7801
.. nonce: tTzdbD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deleting an unset slotted attribute did not raise an AttributeError.

..

.. bpo: 7534
.. date: 7800
.. nonce: UJiEZi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix handling of IEEE specials (infinities, nans, negative zero) in **
operator.  The behaviour now conforms to that described in C99 Annex F.

..

.. bpo: 7579
.. date: 7799
.. nonce: cmOrYb
.. section: Core and Builtins

The msvcrt module now has docstrings for all its functions.

..

.. bpo: 7413
.. date: 7798
.. nonce: g6Euap
.. section: Core and Builtins

Passing '\0' as the separator to datetime.datetime.isoformat() used to drop
the time part of the result.

..

.. bpo: 1811
.. date: 7797
.. nonce: e1nd7g
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve accuracy and cross-platform consistency for true division of
integers: the result of a/b is now correctly rounded for ints a and b (at
least on IEEE 754 platforms), and in particular does not depend on the
internal representation of a long.

..

.. bpo: 6108
.. date: 7796
.. nonce: j3A6pp
.. section: Core and Builtins

``unicode(exception)`` and ``str(exception)`` should return the same message
when only ``__str__()`` (and not ``__unicode__()``) is overridden in the
subclass.

..

.. bpo: 6834
.. date: 7795
.. nonce: iPCAPI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace the implementation for the 'python' and 'pythonw' executables on
OSX.

These executables now work properly with the arch(1) command: ``arch -ppc
python`` will start a universal binary version of python in PPC mode (unlike
previous releases).

..

.. bpo: 1680159
.. date: 7794
.. nonce: zCoubo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Unicode coercion during an 'in' operation no longer masks the underlying
error when the coercion fails for the left hand operand.

..

.. bpo: 7491
.. date: 7793
.. nonce: bGallI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Metaclass's __cmp__ method was ignored.

..

.. bpo: 7466
.. date: 7792
.. nonce: zrhYS4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Segmentation fault when the garbage collector is called in the middle of
populating a tuple.  Patch by Florent Xicluna.

..

.. bpo: 6963
.. date: 7791
.. nonce: TJvFT0
.. section: Library

Added "maxtasksperchild" argument to ``multiprocessing.Pool``, allowing for
a maximum number of tasks within the pool to be completed by the worker
before that worker is terminated, and a new one created to replace it.

..

.. bpo: 7617
.. date: 7790
.. nonce: duSdpP
.. section: Library

Make sure distutils.unixccompiler.UnixCCompiler recognizes gcc when it has a
fully qualified configuration prefix.  Initial patch by Arfrever.

..

.. bpo: 7092
.. date: 7789
.. nonce: 8Bxjpz
.. section: Library

Remove py3k warning when importing cPickle.  2to3 handles renaming of
`cPickle` to `pickle`.  The warning was annoying since there's no
alternative to cPickle if you care about performance.  Patch by Florent
Xicluna.

..

.. bpo: 7455
.. date: 7788
.. nonce: 4QZ2RC
.. section: Library

Fix possible crash in cPickle on invalid input.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 7092
.. date: 7787
.. nonce: z80fv1
.. section: Library

Fix the DeprecationWarnings emitted by the standard library when using the
-3 flag.  Patch by Florent Xicluna.

..

.. bpo: 7471
.. date: 7786
.. nonce: Flh7OS
.. section: Library

Improve the performance of GzipFile's buffering mechanism, and make it
implement the ``io.BufferedIOBase`` ABC to allow for further speedups by
wrapping it in an ``io.BufferedReader``.  Patch by Nir Aides.

..

.. bpo: 3972
.. date: 7785
.. nonce: T0AsF9
.. section: Library

``httplib.HTTPConnection`` now accepts an optional source_address parameter
to allow specifying where your connections come from.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7784
.. nonce: VuT7xt
.. section: Library

``socket.create_connection()`` now accepts an optional source_address
parameter.

..

.. bpo: 5511
.. date: 7783
.. nonce: qXXb66
.. section: Library

``zipfile.ZipFile`` can now be used as a context manager. Initial patch by
Brian Curtin.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7782
.. nonce: jVBfGB
.. section: Library

Distutils now correctly identifies the build architecture as "x86_64" when
building on OSX 10.6 without "-arch" flags.

..

.. bpo: 7556
.. date: 7781
.. nonce: 9TArd4
.. section: Library

Distutils' msvc9compiler now opens the MSVC Manifest file in text mode.

..

.. bpo: 7552
.. date: 7780
.. nonce: cuagLV
.. section: Library

Removed line feed in the base64 Authorization header in the Distutils upload
command to avoid an error when PyPI reads it.  This occurs on long
passwords.  Initial patch by JP St. Pierre.

..

.. bpo: 7231
.. date: 7779
.. nonce: PtW-pZ
.. section: Library

urllib2 cannot handle https with proxy requiring auth.  Patch by Tatsuhiro
Tsujikawa.

..

.. bpo: 7349
.. date: 7778
.. nonce: qwbHfI
.. section: Library

Make methods of file objects in the io module accept None as an argument
where file-like objects (ie StringIO and BytesIO) accept them to mean the
same as passing no argument.

..

.. bpo: 7348
.. date: 7777
.. nonce: 47KswH
.. section: Library

``StringIO.StringIO.readline(-1)`` now acts as if it got no argument like
other file objects.

..

.. bpo: 7357
.. date: 7776
.. nonce: EteBpH
.. section: Library

tarfile no longer suppresses fatal extraction errors by default.

..

.. bpo: 7470
.. date: 7775
.. nonce: IW_7wI
.. section: Library

logging: Fix bug in Unicode encoding fallback.

..

.. bpo: 5949
.. date: 7774
.. nonce: oAWtv2
.. section: Library

Fixed IMAP4_SSL hang when the IMAP server response is missing proper
end-of-line termination.

..

.. bpo: 7457
.. date: 7773
.. nonce: n8Bkqb
.. section: Library

Added a read_pkg_file method to ``distutils.dist.DistributionMetadata``.

..

.. bpo: 3745
.. date: 7772
.. nonce: 1on7AT
.. section: Library

Undo the 2.7a1 change to have hashlib to reject unicode and non buffer API
supporting objects as input.  That behavior is for 3.x only.

..

.. bpo: 7767
.. date: 7771
.. nonce: XmNIZJ
.. section: C API

New function ``PyLong_AsLongLongAndOverflow()`` added, analogous to
``PyLong_AsLongAndOverflow()``.

..

.. bpo: 5080
.. date: 7770
.. nonce: bMlEGy
.. section: C API

The argument parsing functions ``PyArg_ParseTuple()``,
``PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords()``, ``PyArg_VaParse()``,
``PyArg_VaParseTupleAndKeywords()`` and ``PyArg_Parse()`` no longer accept
float arguments for integer format codes (other than 'L'): previously an
attempt to pass a float resulted in a DeprecationWarning; now it gives a
TypeError.  For the 'L' format code (which previously had no warning) there
is now a DeprecationWarning.

..

.. bpo: 7033
.. date: 7769
.. nonce: koLSHo
.. section: C API

Function ``PyErr_NewExceptionWithDoc()`` added.

..

.. bpo: 6491
.. date: 7768
.. nonce: mDJ_mR
.. section: Build

Allow --with-dbmliborder to specify that no dbms will be built.

..

.. bpo: 6943
.. date: 7767
.. nonce: HhHPsy
.. section: Build

Use pkg-config to find the libffi headers when the ``--with-system-ffi``
flag is used.

..

.. bpo: 7609
.. date: 7766
.. nonce: w1witS
.. section: Build

Add a ``--with-system-expat`` option that causes the system's expat library
to be used for the pyexpat module instead of the one included with Python.

..

.. bpo: 7589
.. date: 7765
.. nonce: uh9YyY
.. section: Build

Only build the nis module when the correct header files are found.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7764
.. nonce: 6WvEdi
.. section: Build

Switch to OpenSSL 0.9.8l and sqlite 3.6.21 on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 7541
.. date: 7763
.. nonce: V8g0W6
.. section: Build

when using ``python-config`` with a framework install the compiler might use
the wrong library.

..

.. bpo: 7376
.. date: 7762
.. nonce: Y0Cani
.. section: Tests

Instead of running a self-test (which was failing) when called with no
arguments, doctest.py now gives a usage message.

..

.. bpo: 7396
.. date: 7761
.. nonce: WRRHMZ
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest -s, which was broken by the -j enhancement.

..

.. bpo: 7498
.. date: 7760
.. nonce: Cpaz-t
.. section: Tests

test_multiprocessing now uses test_support.find_unused_port instead of a
hardcoded port number in test_rapid_restart.
