.. bpo: 7301
.. date: 7972
.. nonce: dlecRg
.. release date: 2010-04-10
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add environment variable $PYTHONWARNINGS.

..

.. bpo: 8329
.. date: 7971
.. nonce: ZUTObm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't return the same lists from select.select when no fds are changed.

..

.. bpo: 8259
.. date: 7970
.. nonce: NNoD66
.. section: Core and Builtins

``1L << (2**31)`` no longer produces an 'outrageous shift error' on 64-bit
machines.  The shift count for either left or right shift is permitted to be
up to sys.maxsize.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7969
.. nonce: iwBvru
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that tokenization of identifiers is not affected by locale.

..

.. bpo: 1222585
.. date: 7968
.. nonce: emqFT3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added LDCXXSHARED for C++ support.  Patch by Arfrever.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7967
.. nonce: jCkZ20
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a TypeError when trying to delete a T_STRING_INPLACE struct member.

..

.. bpo: 7994
.. date: 7966
.. nonce: ZEBSAJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Issue a PendingDeprecationWarning if object.__format__ is called with a
non-empty format string. This is an effort to future-proof user code. If a
derived class does not currently implement __format__ but later adds its own
__format__, it would most likely break user code that had supplied a format
string. This will be changed to a DeprecationWarning in Python 3.3 and it
will be an error in Python 3.4.

..

.. bpo: 8268
.. date: 7965
.. nonce: usS51U
.. section: Core and Builtins

Old-style classes (not just instances) now support weak references.

..

.. bpo: 8211
.. date: 7964
.. nonce: InhXpq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Save/restore CFLAGS around AC_PROG_CC in configure.in, in case it is set.

..

.. bpo: 1583863
.. date: 7963
.. nonce: tSkjxk
.. section: Core and Builtins

A unicode subclass can now override the __unicode__ method

..

.. bpo: 6474
.. date: 7962
.. nonce: yFxVuM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make error message from passing an inadequate number of keyword arguments to
a function correct.

..

.. bpo: 8164
.. date: 7961
.. nonce: uRYEY5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't allow lambda functions to have a docstring.

..

.. bpo: 3137
.. date: 7960
.. nonce: Em70dh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't ignore errors at startup, especially a keyboard interrupt (SIGINT).
If an error occurs while importing the site module, the error is printed and
Python exits.  Initialize the GIL before importing the site module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7959
.. nonce: kIQmnN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Code objects now support weak references.

..

.. bpo: 5277
.. date: 7958
.. nonce: CQ8CXN
.. section: Library

Fix quote counting when parsing RFC 2231 encoded parameters.

..

.. bpo: 8321
.. date: 7957
.. nonce: Tul_aA
.. section: Library

Give access to OpenSSL version numbers from the `ssl` module, using the new
attributes `ssl.OPENSSL_VERSION`, `ssl.OPENSSL_VERSION_INFO` and
`ssl.OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER`.

..

.. bpo: 8310
.. date: 7956
.. nonce: 6fu8uc
.. section: Library

Allow dis to examine new style classes.

..

.. bpo: 8257
.. date: 7955
.. nonce: PzabSZ
.. section: Library

The Decimal construct now accepts a float instance directly, converting that
float to a Decimal of equal value:

>>> Decimal(1.1)
Decimal('1.100000000000000088817841970012523233890533447265625')

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7954
.. nonce: 02C1gn
.. section: Library

collections.Counter() now supports a subtract() method.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7953
.. nonce: or8thG
.. section: Library

The functools module now has a total_ordering() class decorator to simplify
the specification of rich comparisons.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7952
.. nonce: nshtA2
.. section: Library

The functools module also adds cmp_to_key() as a tool to transition
old-style comparison functions to new-style key-functions.

..

.. bpo: 8294
.. date: 7951
.. nonce: 42HIIC
.. section: Library

The Fraction constructor now accepts Decimal and float instances directly.

..

.. bpo: 7279
.. date: 7950
.. nonce: v1uyoh
.. section: Library

Comparisons involving a Decimal signaling NaN now signal InvalidOperation
instead of returning False.  (Comparisons involving a quiet NaN are
unchanged.)  Also, Decimal quiet NaNs are now hashable; Decimal signaling
NaNs remain unhashable.

..

.. bpo: 2531
.. date: 7949
.. nonce: ELCENf
.. section: Library

Comparison operations between floats and Decimal instances now return a
result based on the numeric values of the operands; previously they returned
an arbitrary result based on the relative ordering of id(float) and
id(Decimal).

..

.. bpo: 8233
.. date: 7948
.. nonce: xJkVL4
.. section: Library

When run as a script, py_compile.py optionally takes a single argument `-`
which tells it to read files to compile from stdin.  Each line is read on
demand and the named file is compiled immediately.  (Original patch by Piotr
Ożarowski).

..

.. bpo: 3135
.. date: 7947
.. nonce: 5u_w3h
.. section: Library

Add ``inspect.getcallargs()``, which binds arguments to a function like a
normal call.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7946
.. nonce: CTbVhT
.. section: Library

Backwards incompatible change: Unicode codepoints line tabulation (0x0B) and
form feed (0x0C) are now considered linebreaks, as specified in Unicode
Standard Annex #14.  See issue #7643.  http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr14/

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7945
.. nonce: Y0P_8n
.. section: Library

Comparisons using one of <, <=, >, >= between a complex instance and a
Fractions instance now raise TypeError instead of returning True/False.
This makes Fraction <=> complex comparisons consistent with int <=> complex,
float <=> complex, and complex <=> complex comparisons.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7944
.. nonce: POrUTx
.. section: Library

Addition of ``WeakSet`` to the ``weakref`` module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7943
.. nonce: 6xyUXj
.. section: Library

logging: Added LOG_FTP to SysLogHandler and updated documentation.

..

.. bpo: 8205
.. date: 7942
.. nonce: GK6syz
.. section: Library

Remove the "Modules" directory from sys.path when Python is running from the
build directory (POSIX only).

..

.. bpo: 7667
.. date: 7941
.. nonce: 581UIL
.. section: Library

Fix doctest failures with non-ASCII paths.

..

.. bpo: 7512
.. date: 7940
.. nonce: 3tQWru
.. section: Library

shutil.copystat() could raise an OSError when the filesystem didn't support
chflags() (for example ZFS under FreeBSD).  The error is now silenced.

..

.. bpo: 7703
.. date: 7939
.. nonce: _QnWbZ
.. section: Library

ctypes supports both buffer() and memoryview().  The former is deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 7860
.. date: 7938
.. nonce: DV2Y4E
.. section: Library

platform.uname now reports the correct 'machine' type when Python is running
in WOW64 mode on 64 bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7937
.. nonce: ZMh4CS
.. section: Library

logging: Added getChild utility method to Logger and added isEnabledFor
method to LoggerAdapter.

..

.. bpo: 8201
.. date: 7936
.. nonce: Zsfq9o
.. section: Library

logging: Handle situation of non-ASCII and Unicode logger names existing at
the same time, causing a Unicode error when configuration code attempted to
sort the existing loggers.

..

.. bpo: 8200
.. date: 7935
.. nonce: QhAmka
.. section: Library

logging: Handle errors when multiprocessing is not fully loaded when logging
occurs.

..

.. bpo: 3890
.. date: 7934
.. nonce: LxiC0p
.. section: Library

Fix recv() and recv_into() on non-blocking SSL sockets. Also, enable the
SSL_MODE_AUTO_RETRY flag on SSL sockets, so that blocking reads and writes
are always retried by OpenSSL itself. (See also: bpo-8222)

..

.. bpo: 8179
.. date: 7933
.. nonce: 8H5ich
.. section: Library

Fix macpath.realpath() on a non-existing path.

..

.. bpo: 8024
.. date: 7932
.. nonce: OWylMQ
.. section: Library

Update the Unicode database to 5.2.

..

.. bpo: 8104
.. date: 7931
.. nonce: sE4WnG
.. section: Library

socket.recv_into() and socket.recvfrom_into() now support writing into
objects supporting the new buffer API, for example bytearrays or
memoryviews.

..

.. bpo: 4961
.. date: 7930
.. nonce: WDc-2x
.. section: Library

Inconsistent/wrong result of askyesno function in tkMessageBox with
Tcl/Tk-8.5.

..

.. bpo: 8140
.. date: 7929
.. nonce: GfkB7_
.. section: Library

Extend compileall to compile single files.  Add -i option.

..

.. bpo: 7774
.. date: 7928
.. nonce: BddO6b
.. section: Library

Set sys.executable to an empty string if ``argv[0]`` has been set to a non
existent program name and Python is unable to retrieve the real program
name.

..

.. bpo: 8117
.. date: 7927
.. nonce: CFgyRD
.. section: Library

logging: Improved algorithm for computing initial rollover time for
``TimedRotatingFileHandler`` by using the modification time of an existing
log file to compute the next rollover time.  If the log file does not exist,
the current time is used as the basis for the computation.

..

.. bpo: 6472
.. date: 7926
.. nonce: c0VR0M
.. section: Library

The ``xml.etree`` package is updated to ElementTree 1.3.  The cElementTree
module is updated too.

..

.. bpo: 7880
.. date: 7925
.. nonce: oSpS50
.. section: Library

Fix sysconfig when the python executable is a symbolic link.

..

.. bpo: 7624
.. date: 7924
.. nonce: P9QTki
.. section: Library

Fix ``isinstance(foo(), collections.Callable)`` for old-style classes.

..

.. bpo: 7143
.. date: 7923
.. nonce: A30Qss
.. section: Library

email: ``get_payload()`` used to strip any trailing newline from a base64
transfer-encoded payload *after* decoding it; it no longer does. This is a
behavior change, so email's minor version number is now bumped, to version
4.0.2, for the 2.7 release.

..

.. bpo: 8235
.. date: 7922
.. nonce: 7txk3-
.. section: Library

_socket: Add the constant ``SO_SETFIB``.  SO_SETFIB is a socket option
available on FreeBSD 7.1 and newer.

..

.. bpo: 8038
.. date: 7921
.. nonce: GrZDC3
.. section: Library

unittest.TestCase.assertNotRegexpMatches

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7920
.. nonce: V2kHuO
.. section: Library

Addition of -b command line option to unittest for buffering stdout / stderr
during test runs.

..

.. bpo: 1220212
.. date: 7919
.. nonce: GqZ0L4
.. section: Library

Added os.kill support for Windows, including support for sending CTRL+C and
CTRL+BREAK events to console subprocesses.

..

.. bpo: 8314
.. date: 7918
.. nonce: s45vVC
.. section: Library

Fix unsigned long long bug in libffi on Sparc v8.

..

.. bpo: 1039
.. date: 7917
.. nonce: BQUTJH
.. section: Library

Fix os.execlp() crash with missing 2nd argument. (See also: bpo-8154)

..

.. bpo: 8156
.. date: 7916
.. nonce: 5LG8uP
.. section: Library

bsddb module updated to version 4.8.4.
http://www.jcea.es/programacion/pybsddb.htm#bsddb3-4.8.4.  This update drops
support for Berkeley DB 4.0, and adds support for 4.8.

..

.. bpo: 3928
.. date: 7915
.. nonce: kY8ENm
.. section: Library

os.mknod() now available in Solaris, also.

..

.. bpo: 8142
.. date: 7914
.. nonce: ArTkHw
.. section: Library

Update libffi to the 3.0.9 release.

..

.. bpo: 8300
.. date: 7913
.. nonce: fAkvVk
.. section: Library

When passing a non-integer argument to struct.pack with any integer format
code, struct.pack first attempts to convert the non-integer using its
__index__ method.  If that method is non-existent or raises TypeError it
goes on to try the __int__ method, as described below.

..

.. bpo: 1530559
.. date: 7912
.. nonce: KXF5m2
.. section: Library

When passing a non-integer argument to struct.pack with *any* integer format
code (one of 'bBhHiIlLqQ'), struct.pack attempts to use the argument's
__int__ method to convert to an integer before packing.  It also produces a
DeprecationWarning in this case.  (In Python 2.6, the behaviour was
inconsistent: __int__ was used for some integer codes but not for others,
and the set of integer codes for which it was used differed between native
packing and standard packing.)

..

.. bpo: 7347
.. date: 7911
.. nonce: RdqRiz
.. section: Library

_winreg: Add CreateKeyEx and DeleteKeyEx, as well as fix a bug in the return
value of QueryReflectionKey.

..

.. bpo: 7993
.. date: 7910
.. nonce: M7oNRJ
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add a test of IO packet processing bandwidth to ccbench.  It measures the
number of UDP packets processed per second depending on the number of
background CPU-bound Python threads.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7909
.. nonce: KeNbfw
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-config now supports multiple options on the same command line.

..

.. bpo: 8032
.. date: 7908
.. nonce: gv-Du9
.. section: Build

For gdb7, a python-gdb.py file is added to the build, allowing to use
advanced gdb features when debugging Python.

..

.. bpo: 1628484
.. date: 7907
.. nonce: wcrSr1
.. section: Build

The Makefile doesn't ignore the CFLAGS environment variable anymore.  It
also forwards the LDFLAGS settings to the linker when building a shared
library.

..

.. bpo: 6716
.. date: 7906
.. nonce: tQLBdR
.. section: Build

Quote -x arguments of compileall in MSI installer.

..

.. bpo: 7705
.. date: 7905
.. nonce: sw6ifg
.. section: Build

Fix linking on FreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7904
.. nonce: Dm_ncE
.. section: Build

Make sure that the FreeBSD build of the included libffi uses the proper
assembly file.

..

.. bpo: 8276
.. date: 7903
.. nonce: 40pgLF
.. section: C API

PyEval_CallObject() is now only available in macro form.  The function
declaration, which was kept for backwards compatibility reasons, is now
removed (the macro was introduced in 1997!).

..

.. bpo: 7992
.. date: 7902
.. nonce: 2eLlya
.. section: C API

A replacement PyCObject API, PyCapsule, has been backported from Python 3.1.
All existing Python CObjects in the main distribution have been converted to
capsules.  To address backwards-compatibility concerns,
PyCObject_AsVoidPtr() was changed to understand capsules.

..

.. bpo: 3864
.. date: 7901
.. nonce: bkbNiO
.. section: Tests

Skip three test_signal tests on freebsd6 because they fail if any thread was
previously started, most likely due to a platform bug.

..

.. bpo: 8348
.. date: 7900
.. nonce: Nygf2t
.. section: Tests

Fix test ftp url in test_urllib2net.

..

.. bpo: 8204
.. date: 7899
.. nonce: iYMJ7_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ttk notebook test by forcing focus.

..

.. bpo: 8344
.. date: 7898
.. nonce: kt2Sq_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ttk bug on FreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 8193
.. date: 7897
.. nonce: T8MbIc
.. section: Tests

Fix test_zlib failure with zlib 1.2.4.

..

.. bpo: 8248
.. date: 7896
.. nonce: pBx5bT
.. section: Tests

Add some tests for the bool type.  Patch by Gregory Nofi.

..

.. bpo: 8263
.. date: 7895
.. nonce: zNUf-5
.. section: Tests

Now regrtest.py will report a failure if it receives a KeyboardInterrupt
(SIGINT).

..

.. bpo: 8180
.. date: 7894
.. nonce: yyLvZY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_pep277 on OS X and add more tests for special Unicode normalization
cases. (See also: bpo-8207)

..

.. bpo: 7783
.. date: 7893
.. nonce: K20ttO
.. section: Tests

test.test_support.open_urlresource invalidates the outdated files from the
local cache.
