.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8039
.. nonce: 8aqNKP
.. release date: 2010-05-08
.. section: Core and Builtins

Run Clang 2.7's static analyzer for ``Objects/`` and ``Python/``.

..

.. bpo: 1533
.. date: 8038
.. nonce: 6FLjC9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix inconsistency in range function argument processing: any non-float
non-integer argument is now converted to an integer (if possible) using its
__int__ method.  Previously, only small arguments were treated this way;
larger arguments (those whose __int__ was outside the range of a C long)
would produce a TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 8202
.. date: 8037
.. nonce: UvqmQ2
.. section: Core and Builtins

``sys.argv[0]`` is now set to '-m' instead of '-c' when searching for the
module file to be executed with the -m command line option.

..

.. bpo: 7319
.. date: 8036
.. nonce: Ry0QuX
.. section: Core and Builtins

When -Q is used, do not silence DeprecationWarning.

..

.. bpo: 7332
.. date: 8035
.. nonce: mCUzwz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the 16KB stack-based buffer in ``PyMarshal_ReadLastObjectFromFile``,
which doesn't bring any noticeable benefit compared to the dynamic memory
allocation fallback.  Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 8417
.. date: 8034
.. nonce: qcRfh8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise an OverflowError when an integer larger than sys.maxsize is passed to
bytearray.

..

.. bpo: 7072
.. date: 8033
.. nonce: YGHQG7
.. section: Core and Builtins

``isspace(0xa0)`` is true on Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 8404
.. date: 8032
.. nonce: 0krGPF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix set operations on dictionary views.

..

.. bpo: 8084
.. date: 8031
.. nonce: uiAFoS
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 370 now conforms to system conventions for framework builds on MacOS X.
That is, ``python setup.py install --user`` will install into
``~/Library/Python/2.7`` instead of ``~/.local``.

..

.. bpo: 8681
.. date: 8030
.. nonce: bnD2Mi
.. section: Library

Make the zlib module's error messages more informative when the zlib itself
doesn't give any detailed explanation.

..

.. bpo: 8571
.. date: 8029
.. nonce: BGxcud
.. section: Library

Fix an internal error when compressing or decompressing a chunk larger than
1GB with the zlib module's compressor and decompressor objects.

..

.. bpo: 8573
.. date: 8028
.. nonce: PZTYKm
.. section: Library

asyncore ``_strerror()`` function might throw ValueError.

..

.. bpo: 8483
.. date: 8027
.. nonce: gWRwCr
.. section: Library

asyncore.dispatcher's __getattr__ method produced confusing error messages
when accessing undefined class attributes because of the cheap inheritance
with the underlying socket object.  The cheap inheritance has been
deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 4265
.. date: 8026
.. nonce: gtcR-h
.. section: Library

``shutil.copyfile()`` was leaking file descriptors when disk fills.  Patch
by Tres Seaver.

..

.. bpo: 7755
.. date: 8025
.. nonce: k5FaAX
.. section: Library

Use an unencumbered audio file for tests.

..

.. bpo: 8621
.. date: 8024
.. nonce: 64sJJn
.. section: Library

``uuid.uuid4()`` returned the same sequence of values in the parent and any
children created using ``os.fork`` on Mac OS X 10.6.

..

.. bpo: 8313
.. date: 8023
.. nonce: lE868K
.. section: Library

``traceback.format_exception_only()`` encodes unicode message to ASCII with
backslashreplace error handler if ``str(value)`` failed.

..

.. bpo: 8567
.. date: 8022
.. nonce: agGfsd
.. section: Library

Fix precedence of signals in Decimal module: when a Decimal operation raises
multiple signals and more than one of those signals is trapped, the
specification determines the order in which the signals should be handled.
In many cases this order wasn't being followed, leading to the wrong Python
exception being raised.

..

.. bpo: 7865
.. date: 8021
.. nonce: YF-RSw
.. section: Library

The close() method of :mod:`io` objects should not swallow exceptions raised
by the implicit flush().  Also ensure that calling close() several times is
supported.  Patch by Pascal Chambon.

..

.. bpo: 8576
.. date: 8020
.. nonce: P-vn7s
.. section: Library

logging updated to remove usage of find_unused_port().

..

.. bpo: 4687
.. date: 8019
.. nonce: WuWPAI
.. section: Library

Fix accuracy of garbage collection runtimes displayed with gc.DEBUG_STATS.

..

.. bpo: 8354
.. date: 8018
.. nonce: ihPpD8
.. section: Library

The siginterrupt setting is now preserved for all signals, not just SIGCHLD.

..

.. bpo: 7192
.. date: 8017
.. nonce: crfmVq
.. section: Library

``webbrowser.get("firefox")`` now works on Mac OS X, as does
``webbrowser.get("safari")``.

..

.. bpo: 8577
.. date: 8016
.. nonce: aNmUf8
.. section: Library

``distutils.sysconfig.get_python_inc()`` now makes a difference between the
build dir and the source dir when looking for "python.h" or "Include".

..

.. bpo: 8464
.. date: 8015
.. nonce: dckIPz
.. section: Library

tarfile no longer creates files with execute permissions set when mode="w|"
is used.

..

.. bpo: 7834
.. date: 8014
.. nonce: 6FWkzA
.. section: Library

Fix connect() of Bluetooth L2CAP sockets with recent versions of the Linux
kernel.  Patch by Yaniv Aknin.

..

.. bpo: 6312
.. date: 8013
.. nonce: ZgHCwc
.. section: Library

Fix http HEAD request when the transfer encoding is chunked.  It should
correctly return an empty response now.

..

.. bpo: 7490
.. date: 8012
.. nonce: hT8uzG
.. section: Library

To facilitate sharing of doctests between 2.x and 3.x test suites, the
``IGNORE_EXCEPTION_DETAIL`` directive now also ignores the module location
of the raised exception.  Based on initial patch by Lennart Regebro.

..

.. bpo: 8086
.. date: 8011
.. nonce: Nn01DF
.. section: Library

In :func:`ssl.DER_cert_to_PEM_cert()`, fix missing newline before the
certificate footer.  Patch by Kyle VanderBeek.

..

.. bpo: 8546
.. date: 8010
.. nonce: ZJV_Z2
.. section: Library

Reject None given as the buffering argument to ``_pyio.open()``.

..

.. bpo: 8549
.. date: 8009
.. nonce: 9m7vbm
.. section: Library

Fix compiling the _ssl extension under AIX.  Patch by Sridhar Ratnakumar.

..

.. bpo: 6656
.. date: 8008
.. nonce: oU6_NU
.. section: Library

Fix locale.format_string to handle escaped percents and mappings.

..

.. bpo: 2302
.. date: 8007
.. nonce: KqJUA8
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in SocketServer.BaseServer.shutdown, where the method
could block indefinitely if called just before the event loop started
running.  This also fixes the occasional freezes witnessed in
test_httpservers.

..

.. bpo: 5103
.. date: 8006
.. nonce: mBe0-l
.. section: Library

SSL handshake would ignore the socket timeout and block indefinitely if the
other end didn't respond.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8005
.. nonce: XlQAbN
.. section: Library

The do_handshake() method of SSL objects now adjusts the blocking mode of
the SSL structure if necessary (as other methods already do).

..

.. bpo: 7507
.. date: 8004
.. nonce: PPZWiA
.. section: Library

Quote "!" in pipes.quote(); it is special to some shells.

..

.. bpo: 5238
.. date: 8003
.. nonce: HjIVqr
.. section: Library

Calling makefile() on an SSL object would prevent the underlying socket from
being closed until all objects get truely destroyed.

..

.. bpo: 7943
.. date: 8002
.. nonce: 0wcepT
.. section: Library

Fix circular reference created when instantiating an SSL socket. Initial
patch by Péter Szabó.

..

.. bpo: 8451
.. date: 8001
.. nonce: vWZKfu
.. section: Library

Syslog module now uses basename(sys.argv[0]) instead of the string "python"
as the *ident*.  openlog() arguments are all optional and keywords.

..

.. bpo: 8108
.. date: 8000
.. nonce: gw3ghC
.. section: Library

Fix the unwrap() method of SSL objects when the socket has a non-infinite
timeout.  Also make that method friendlier with applications wanting to
continue using the socket in clear-text mode, by disabling OpenSSL's
internal readahead.  Thanks to Darryl Miles for guidance.

..

.. bpo: 8484
.. date: 7999
.. nonce: b9zFsh
.. section: Library

Load all ciphers and digest algorithms when initializing the _ssl extension,
such that verification of some SSL certificates doesn't fail because of an
"unknown algorithm".

..

.. bpo: 8437
.. date: 7998
.. nonce: iGGyX3
.. section: Library

Fix test_gdb failures, patch written by Dave Malcolm

..

.. bpo: 4814
.. date: 7997
.. nonce: kc5m59
.. section: Library

The timeout parameter is now applied also for connections resulting from
PORT/EPRT commands.

..

.. bpo: 8463
.. date: 7996
.. nonce: slxxrW
.. section: Library

Add missing reference to bztar in shutil's documentation.

..

.. bpo: 8438
.. date: 7995
.. nonce: TUjaAU
.. section: Library

Remove reference to the missing "surrogateescape" encoding error handler
from the new IO library.

..

.. bpo: 3817
.. date: 7994
.. nonce: 6zjb85
.. section: Library

ftplib.FTP.abort() method now considers 225 a valid response code as stated
in RFC-959 at chapter 5.4.

..

.. bpo: 8279
.. date: 7993
.. nonce: MubiOg
.. section: Library

Fix test_gdb failures.

..

.. bpo: 8322
.. date: 7992
.. nonce: XVocgc
.. section: Library

Add a *ciphers* argument to SSL sockets, so as to change the available
cipher list.  Helps fix test_ssl with OpenSSL 1.0.0.

..

.. bpo: 2987
.. date: 7991
.. nonce: FbxT-M
.. section: Library

RFC 2732 support for urlparse (IPv6 addresses).  Patch by Tony Locke and
Hans Ulrich Niedermann.

..

.. bpo: 7585
.. date: 7990
.. nonce: stGadz
.. section: Library

difflib context and unified diffs now place a tab between filename and date,
conforming to the 'standards' they were originally designed to follow.  This
improves compatibility with patch tools.

..

.. bpo: 7472
.. date: 7989
.. nonce: IghBPp
.. section: Library

Fixed typo in email.encoders module; messages using ISO-2022 character sets
will now consistently use a Content-Transfer-Encoding of 7bit rather than
sometimes being marked as 8bit.

..

.. bpo: 8330
.. date: 7988
.. nonce: LPDqBG
.. section: Library

Fix expected output in test_gdb.

..

.. bpo: 8374
.. date: 7987
.. nonce: bWoGdD
.. section: Library

Update the internal alias table in the :mod:`locale` module to cover recent
locale changes and additions.

..

.. bpo: 8644
.. date: 7986
.. nonce: JWO_61
.. section: Library

Improved accuracy of ``timedelta.total_seconds()``.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7985
.. nonce: LYHXVb
.. section: Library

Use Clang 2.7's static analyzer to find places to clean up some code.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7984
.. nonce: jbiDIM
.. section: Library

Build the ossaudio extension on GNU/kFreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7983
.. nonce: NCKMWo
.. section: Library

On Windows, ctypes no longer checks the stack before and after calling a
foreign function.  This allows using the unmodified libffi library.

..

.. bpo: 8672
.. date: 7982
.. nonce: hs9Ync
.. section: Tests

Add a zlib test ensuring that an incomplete stream can be handled by a
decompressor object without errors (it returns incomplete uncompressed
data).

..

.. bpo: 8490
.. date: 7981
.. nonce: yG1Xr0
.. section: Tests

asyncore now has a more solid test suite which actually tests its API.

..

.. bpo: 8576
.. date: 7980
.. nonce: Up6MTB
.. section: Tests

Remove use of find_unused_port() in test_smtplib and test_multiprocessing.
Patch by Paul Moore.

..

.. bpo: 7449
.. date: 7979
.. nonce: as77J5
.. section: Tests

Fix many tests to support Python compiled without thread support. Patches
written by Jerry Seutter.

..

.. bpo: 8108
.. date: 7978
.. nonce: -PlMAS
.. section: Tests

test_ftplib's non-blocking SSL server now has proper handling of SSL
shutdowns.

..

.. bpo: 8625
.. date: 7977
.. nonce: E4dSUW
.. section: Build

Turn off optimization in ``--with-pydebug`` builds with gcc. (Optimization
was unintentionally turned on in gcc --with-pydebug builds in 2.7 beta1 as a
result of the issue #1628484 fix, combined with autoconf's strange choice of
default CFLAGS produced by AC_PROG_CC for gcc.)

..

.. bpo: 8509
.. date: 7976
.. nonce: N8vHHZ
.. section: Build

Fix quoting in help strings and code snippets in configure.in.

..

.. bpo: 3646
.. date: 7975
.. nonce: UyNDbm
.. section: Build

It is now easily possible to install a Python framework into your home
directory on Mac OS X, see Mac/README for more information.

..

.. bpo: 8510
.. date: 7974
.. nonce: 8MiUfR
.. section: Build

Update to autoconf 2.65.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7973
.. nonce: 18HloG
.. section: Windows

Update the Vim syntax highlight file.
