.. bpo: 9058
.. date: 8091
.. nonce: l34Hmg
.. release date: 2010-06-20
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove assertions about INT_MAX in UnicodeDecodeError.

..

.. bpo: 8202
.. date: 8090
.. nonce: D-a4-i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Previous change to ``sys.argv[0]`` handling for -m command line option
reverted due to unintended side effects on handling of ``sys.path``. See
tracker issue for details.

..

.. bpo: 8941
.. date: 8089
.. nonce: p6MUoO
.. section: Core and Builtins

decoding big endian UTF-32 data in UCS-2 builds could crash the interpreter
with characters outside the Basic Multilingual Plane (higher than 0x10000).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8088
.. nonce: diKrLc
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the unicode/str.format(), raise a ValueError when indexes to arguments
are too large.

..

.. bpo: 8854
.. date: 8087
.. nonce: gOjstX
.. section: Build

Fix finding Visual Studio 2008 on Windows x64.

..

.. bpo: 6589
.. date: 8086
.. nonce: nEjgGc
.. section: Library

cleanup asyncore.socket_map in case smtpd.SMTPServer constructor raises an
exception.

..

.. bpo: 8959
.. date: 8085
.. nonce: lO7u2O
.. section: Library

fix regression caused by using unmodified libffi library on Windows.  ctypes
does now again check the stack before and after calling foreign functions.

..

.. bpo: 8720
.. date: 8084
.. nonce: rgLhvU
.. section: Library

fix regression caused by fix for #4050 by making getsourcefile smart enough
to find source files in the linecache.

..

.. bpo: 8986
.. date: 8083
.. nonce: f31LM5
.. section: Library

math.erfc was incorrectly raising OverflowError for values between -27.3 and
-30.0 on some platforms.

..

.. bpo: 8924
.. date: 8082
.. nonce: ENI5YP
.. section: Library

logging: Improved error handling for Unicode in exception text.

..

.. bpo: 8948
.. date: 8081
.. nonce: BIIiQc
.. section: Library

cleanup functions and class / module setups and teardowns are now honored in
unittest debug methods.

..

.. bpo: 8909
.. date: 8080
.. nonce: OfU6lI
.. section: Documentation

Added the size of the bitmap used in the installer created by distutils'
bdist_wininst. Patch by Anatoly Techtonik.

..

.. bpo: 8362
.. date: 8079
.. nonce: KsG-3E
.. section: Windows

Add maintainers.rst: list of module maintainers
