.. bpo: 8271
.. date: 8078
.. nonce: HKwc-i
.. release date: 2010-06-05
.. section: Core and Builtins

during the decoding of an invalid UTF-8 byte sequence, only the start byte
and the continuation byte(s) are now considered invalid, instead of the
number of bytes specified by the start byte. E.g.:
'\xf1\x80AB'.decode('utf-8', 'replace') now returns u'\ufffdAB' and replaces
with U+FFFD only the start byte ('\xf1') and the continuation byte ('\x80')
even if '\xf1' is the start byte of a 4-bytes sequence. Previous versions
returned a single u'\ufffd'.

..

.. bpo: 8627
.. date: 8077
.. nonce: l2l6Zs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove bogus "Overriding __cmp__ blocks inheritance of __hash__ in 3.x"
warning.  Also fix "XXX undetected error" that arises from the "Overriding
__eq__ blocks inheritance ..." warning when turned into an exception: in
this case the exception simply gets ignored.

..

.. bpo: 8748
.. date: 8076
.. nonce: bKymOB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix two issues with comparisons between complex and integer objects.  (1)
The comparison could incorrectly return True in some cases (2**53+1 ==
complex(2**53) == 2**53), breaking transivity of equality. (2) The
comparison raised an OverflowError for large integers, leading to
unpredictable exceptions when combining integers and complex objects in sets
or dicts.

..

.. bpo: 5211
.. date: 8075
.. nonce: BNwm54
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implicit coercion for the complex type is now completely removed.  (Coercion
for arithmetic operations was already removed in 2.7 alpha 4, but coercion
for rich comparisons was accidentally left in.)

..

.. bpo: 3798
.. date: 8074
.. nonce: L9n27k
.. section: Core and Builtins

Write sys.exit() message to sys.stderr to use stderr encoding and error
handler, instead of writing to the C stderr file in utf-8

..

.. bpo: 7902
.. date: 8073
.. nonce: K75Ezw
.. section: Core and Builtins

When using explicit relative import syntax, don't try implicit relative
import semantics.

..

.. bpo: 7079
.. date: 8072
.. nonce: wEGBdB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible crash when closing a file object while using it from another
thread.  Patch by Daniel Stutzbach.

..

.. bpo: 8868
.. date: 8071
.. nonce: rg3J-W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix that ensures that python scripts have access to the Window Server again
in a framework build on MacOSX 10.5 or earlier.

..

.. bpo: 5753
.. date: 8070
.. nonce: 205374
.. section: C API

A new C API function, :cfunc:`PySys_SetArgvEx`, allows embedders of the
interpreter to set sys.argv without also modifying sys.path.  This helps fix
`CVE-2008-5983
<http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2008-5983>`_.

..

.. bpo: 8302
.. date: 8069
.. nonce: U5tZ_l
.. section: Library

SkipTest in unittest.TestCase.setUpClass or setUpModule is now reported as a
skip rather than an error.

..

.. bpo: 8351
.. date: 8068
.. nonce: 8I5oO-
.. section: Library

Excessively large diffs due to unittest.TestCase.assertSequenceEqual are no
longer included in failure reports.

..

.. bpo: 8899
.. date: 8067
.. nonce: Q6oIpy
.. section: Library

time.struct_time now has class and attribute docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 4487
.. date: 8066
.. nonce: WdV86e
.. section: Library

email now accepts as charset aliases all codec aliases accepted by the
codecs module.

..

.. bpo: 6470
.. date: 8065
.. nonce: eVTlgU
.. section: Library

Drop UNC prefix in FixTk.

..

.. bpo: 5610
.. date: 8064
.. nonce: 3x0O2c
.. section: Library

feedparser no longer eats extra characters at the end of a body part if the
body part ends with a \r\n.

..

.. bpo: 8833
.. date: 8063
.. nonce: R9JBZA
.. section: Library

tarfile created hard link entries with a size field != 0 by mistake.

..

.. bpo: 1368247
.. date: 8062
.. nonce: OVD5zb
.. section: Library

set_charset (and therefore MIMEText) now automatically encodes a unicode
_payload to the output_charset.

..

.. bpo: 7150
.. date: 8061
.. nonce: kBTznJ
.. section: Library

Raise OverflowError if the result of adding or subtracting timedelta from
date or datetime falls outside of the MINYEAR:MAXYEAR range.

..

.. bpo: 6662
.. date: 8060
.. nonce: jpO1QX
.. section: Library

Fix parsing of malformatted charref (&#bad;), patch written by Fredrik Håård

..

.. bpo: 8016
.. date: 8059
.. nonce: vAmdrz
.. section: Library

Add the CP858 codec.

..

.. bpo: 3924
.. date: 8058
.. nonce: -W1f1B
.. section: Library

Ignore cookies with invalid "version" field in cookielib.

..

.. bpo: 6268
.. date: 8057
.. nonce: fQgJxL
.. section: Library

Fix seek() method of codecs.open(), don't read or write the BOM twice after
seek(0). Fix also reset() method of codecs, UTF-16, UTF-32 and StreamWriter
classes.

..

.. bpo: 5640
.. date: 8056
.. nonce: dpc6TZ
.. section: Library

Fix Shift-JIS incremental encoder for error handlers different than
'strict'.

..

.. bpo: 8782
.. date: 8055
.. nonce: asLuOV
.. section: Library

Add a trailing newline in linecache.updatecache to the last line of files
without one.

..

.. bpo: 8729
.. date: 8054
.. nonce: Nq_Uhf
.. section: Library

Return NotImplemented from ``collections.Mapping.__eq__()`` when comparing
to a non-mapping.

..

.. bpo: 8759
.. date: 8053
.. nonce: 0yDlu7
.. section: Library

Fix user paths in sysconfig for posix and os2 schemes.

..

.. bpo: 1285086
.. date: 8052
.. nonce: U8BtXR
.. section: Library

Speed up ``urllib.quote()`` and urllib.unquote for simple cases.

..

.. bpo: 8688
.. date: 8051
.. nonce: gUJqmI
.. section: Library

Distutils now recalculates MANIFEST every time.

..

.. bpo: 5099
.. date: 8050
.. nonce: kmjFaU
.. section: Library

The ``__del__()`` method of ``subprocess.Popen`` (and the methods it calls)
referenced global objects, causing errors to pop up during interpreter
shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 7384
.. date: 8049
.. nonce: E16zrc
.. section: Library

If the system readline library is linked against ncurses, the curses module
must be linked against ncurses as well. Otherwise it is not safe to load
both the readline and curses modules in an application.

..

.. bpo: 2810
.. date: 8048
.. nonce: FSt0Y0
.. section: Library

Fix cases where the Windows registry API returns ERROR_MORE_DATA, requiring
a re-try in order to get the complete result.

..

.. bpo: 8674
.. date: 8047
.. nonce: Q2kfWX
.. section: Library

Fixed a number of incorrect or undefined-behaviour-inducing overflow checks
in the ``audioop`` module.

..

.. bpo: 8889
.. date: 8046
.. nonce: 9IoVzA
.. section: Tests

test_support.transient_internet rewritten so that the new checks also work
on FreeBSD, which lacks EAI_NODATA.

..

.. bpo: 8835
.. date: 8045
.. nonce: FJzJvJ
.. section: Tests

test_support.transient_internet() catches gaierror(EAI_NONAME) and
gaierror(EAI_NODATA)

..

.. bpo: 7449
.. date: 8044
.. nonce: LeKyd_
.. section: Tests

Skip test_socketserver if threading support is disabled

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8043
.. nonce: b_na1a
.. section: Tests

On darwin, ``test_site`` assumed that a framework build was being used,
leading to a failure where four directories were expected for site-packages
instead of two in a non-framework build.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8042
.. nonce: g-v7fs
.. section: Build

Display installer warning that Windows 2000 won't be supported in future
releases.

..

.. bpo: 1759169
.. date: 8041
.. nonce: NW035m
.. section: Build

Drop _XOPEN_SOURCE on Solaris, define it for multiprocessing only. (See
also: bpo-8864)

..

.. bpo: 5464
.. date: 8040
.. nonce: R1pj9Y
.. section: Tools/Demos

Implement plural forms in msgfmt.py.
