.. date: 2022-06-15-20-09-23
.. gh-issue: 87389
.. nonce: QVaC3f
.. release date: 2022-08-01
.. section: Security

:mod:`http.server`: Fix an open redirection vulnerability in the HTTP server
when an URI path starts with ``//``.  Vulnerability discovered, and initial
fix proposed, by Hamza Avvan.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-08-53-07
.. gh-issue: 92888
.. nonce: TLtR9W
.. section: Security

Fix ``memoryview`` use after free when accessing the backing buffer in
certain cases.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-08-33-31
.. gh-issue: 95355
.. nonce: yN4XVk
.. section: Core and Builtins

``_PyPegen_Parser_New`` now properly detects token memory allocation errors.
Patch by Honglin Zhu.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-09-41-55
.. gh-issue: 94938
.. nonce: xYBlM7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error detection in some builtin functions when keyword argument name is
an instance of a str subclass with overloaded ``__eq__`` and ``__hash__``.
Previously it could cause SystemError or other undesired behavior.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-05-10-29
.. gh-issue: 94949
.. nonce: OsZ7_s
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse parenthesized context managers when
passed ``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 9)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-04-48-34
.. gh-issue: 94947
.. nonce: df9gUw
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse assignment expressions when passed
``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 8)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-08-14-17
.. gh-issue: 94869
.. nonce: eRwMsX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the column offsets for some expressions in multi-line f-strings
:mod:`ast` nodes. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-16-15-04
.. gh-issue: 91153
.. nonce: HiBmtt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where a :class:`bytearray` item assignment could crash if it's
resized by the new value's :meth:`__index__` method.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-15-45-04
.. gh-issue: 94329
.. nonce: olUQyk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compile and run code with unpacking of extremely large sequences (1000s of
elements). Such code failed to compile. It now compiles and runs correctly.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-14-20-36
.. gh-issue: 94360
.. nonce: DiEnen
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a tokenizer crash when reading encoded files with syntax errors from
``stdin`` with non utf-8 encoded text. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-26-14-37-03
.. gh-issue: 94192
.. nonce: ab7tn7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error for dictionary literals with invalid expression as value.

..

.. date: 2022-06-21-05-07-00
.. gh-issue: 93964
.. nonce: Cg1LE7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Strengthened compiler overflow checks to prevent crashes when compiling very
large source files.

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-12-03-17
.. gh-issue: 93671
.. nonce: idkQqG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some exponential backtrace case happening with deeply nested sequence
patterns in match statements. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-09-25-34
.. gh-issue: 93021
.. nonce: k3Aji2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the :attr:`__text_signature__` for :meth:`__get__` methods implemented
in C. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-18-34-45
.. gh-issue: 92930
.. nonce: kpYPOb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in ``_pickle.c`` from mutating collections during
``__reduce__`` or ``persistent_id``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-08-32-33
.. gh-issue: 92914
.. nonce: tJUeTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Always round the allocated size for lists up to the nearest even number.

..

.. date: 2022-05-17-20-41-43
.. gh-issue: 92858
.. nonce: eIXJTn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message for some suites with syntax error before ':'

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-19-43-07
.. gh-issue: 95339
.. nonce: NuVQ68
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 22.2.1.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-11-35-45
.. gh-issue: 95045
.. nonce: iysT-Q
.. section: Library

Fix GC crash when deallocating ``_lsprof.Profiler`` by untracking it before
calling any callbacks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-59-02
.. gh-issue: 95087
.. nonce: VvqXkN
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError in parsing invalid date in the :mod:`email` module.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-00-06
.. gh-issue: 95199
.. nonce: -5A64k
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled setuptools to 63.2.0.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-09-15-35
.. gh-issue: 95194
.. nonce: ERVmqG
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled pip to 22.2.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-50-05
.. gh-issue: 93899
.. nonce: VT34A5
.. section: Library

Fix check for existence of :data:`os.EFD_CLOEXEC`, :data:`os.EFD_NONBLOCK`
and :data:`os.EFD_SEMAPHORE` flags on older kernel versions where these
flags are not present. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-42-05
.. gh-issue: 95166
.. nonce: xw6p3C
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`concurrent.futures.Executor.map` to cancel the currently waiting
on future on an error - e.g. TimeoutError or KeyboardInterrupt.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-17-19-57
.. gh-issue: 93157
.. nonce: RXByAk
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`fileinput` module didn't support ``errors`` option when
``inplace`` is true.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-00-43-52
.. gh-issue: 94821
.. nonce: e17ghU
.. section: Library

Fix binding of unix socket to empty address on Linux to use an available
address from the abstract namespace, instead of "\0".

..

.. date: 2022-07-11-10-41-48
.. gh-issue: 94736
.. nonce: EbsgeK
.. section: Library

Fix crash when deallocating an instance of a subclass of
``_multiprocessing.SemLock``. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-15-46-55
.. gh-issue: 94637
.. nonce: IYEiUM
.. section: Library

:meth:`SSLContext.set_default_verify_paths` now releases the GIL around
``SSL_CTX_set_default_verify_paths`` call. The function call performs I/O
and CPU intensive work.

..

.. date: 2022-07-02-19-46-30
.. gh-issue: 94510
.. nonce: xOatDC
.. section: Library

Re-entrant calls to :func:`sys.setprofile` and :func:`sys.settrace` now
raise :exc:`RuntimeError`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-09-48-37
.. gh-issue: 92336
.. nonce: otA6c6
.. section: Library

Fix bug where :meth:`linecache.getline` fails on bad files with
:exc:`UnicodeDecodeError` or :exc:`SyntaxError`. It now returns an empty
string as per the documentation.

..

.. date: 2022-06-26-10-59-15
.. gh-issue: 89988
.. nonce: K8rnmt
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in :class:`pickle.Pickler` when looking up
:attr:`dispatch_table`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-16-27-02
.. gh-issue: 94254
.. nonce: beP16v
.. section: Library

Fixed types of :mod:`struct` module to be immutable. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-13-33-18
.. gh-issue: 94245
.. nonce: -zQY1a
.. section: Library

Fix pickling and copying of ``typing.Tuple[()]``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-19-23-59
.. gh-issue: 94207
.. nonce: VhS1eS
.. section: Library

Made :class:`_struct.Struct` GC-tracked in order to fix a reference leak in
the :mod:`_struct` module.

..

.. date: 2022-06-22-11-16-11
.. gh-issue: 94101
.. nonce: V9vDG8
.. section: Library

Manual instantiation of :class:`ssl.SSLSession` objects is no longer allowed
as it lead to misconfigured instances that crashed the interpreter when
attributes where accessed on them.

..

.. date: 2022-06-21-11-40-31
.. gh-issue: 84753
.. nonce: FW1pxO
.. section: Library

:func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction`, :func:`inspect.isgeneratorfunction`,
and :func:`inspect.isasyncgenfunction` now properly return ``True`` for
duck-typed function-like objects like instances of
:class:`unittest.mock.AsyncMock`.

This makes :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction` consistent with the behavior
of :func:`asyncio.iscoroutinefunction`.  Patch by Mehdi ABAAKOUK.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-21-28-16
.. gh-issue: 83499
.. nonce: u3DQJ-
.. section: Library

Fix double closing of file description in :mod:`tempfile`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-11-13-32-17
.. gh-issue: 79512
.. nonce: A1KTDr
.. section: Library

Fixed names and ``__module__`` value of :mod:`weakref` classes
:class:`~weakref.ReferenceType`, :class:`~weakref.ProxyType`,
:class:`~weakref.CallableProxyType`. It makes them pickleable.

..

.. date: 2022-06-08-20-11-02
.. gh-issue: 90494
.. nonce: LIZT85
.. section: Library

:func:`copy.copy` and :func:`copy.deepcopy` now always raise a TypeError if
``__reduce__()`` returns a tuple with length 6 instead of silently ignore
the 6th item or produce incorrect result.

..

.. date: 2022-06-07-14-53-46
.. gh-issue: 90549
.. nonce: T4FMKY
.. section: Library

Fix a multiprocessing bug where a global named resource (such as a
semaphore) could leak when a child process is spawned (as opposed to
forked).

..

.. date: 2022-06-06-12-58-27
.. gh-issue: 79579
.. nonce: e8rB-M
.. section: Library

:mod:`sqlite3` now correctly detects DML queries with leading comments.
Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-05-22-22-42
.. gh-issue: 93421
.. nonce: 43UO_8
.. section: Library

Update :data:`sqlite3.Cursor.rowcount` when a DML statement has run to
completion. This fixes the row count for SQL queries like ``UPDATE ...
RETURNING``. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-02-08-40-58
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: Gtk44w
.. section: Library

Suppress writing an XML declaration in open files in ``ElementTree.write()``
with ``encoding='unicode'`` and ``xml_declaration=None``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-31-14-58-40
.. gh-issue: 93353
.. nonce: 9Hvm6o
.. section: Library

Fix the :func:`importlib.resources.as_file` context manager to remove the
temporary file if destroyed late during Python finalization: keep a local
reference to the :func:`os.remove` function. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-21-42-50
.. gh-issue: 83658
.. nonce: 01Ntx0
.. section: Library

Make :class:`multiprocessing.Pool` raise an exception if
``maxtasksperchild`` is not ``None`` or a positive int.

..

.. date: 2022-05-24-11-19-04
.. gh-issue: 74696
.. nonce: -cnf-A
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.make_archive` no longer temporarily changes the current
working directory during creation of standard ``.zip`` or tar archives.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-17-38-55
.. gh-issue: 91577
.. nonce: Ah7cLL
.. section: Library

Move imports in :class:`~multiprocessing.SharedMemory` methods to module
level so that they can be executed late in python finalization.

..

.. bpo: 47231
.. date: 2022-04-08-22-12-11
.. nonce: lvyglt
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue with inconsistent trailing slashes in tarfile longname
directories.

..

.. bpo: 46755
.. date: 2022-02-15-12-40-48
.. nonce: zePJfx
.. section: Library

In :class:`QueueHandler`, clear ``stack_info`` from :class:`LogRecord` to
prevent stack trace from being written twice.

..

.. bpo: 46053
.. date: 2022-02-06-12-59-32
.. nonce: sHFo3S
.. section: Library

Fix OSS audio support on NetBSD.

..

.. bpo: 46197
.. date: 2022-01-03-15-07-06
.. nonce: Z0djv6
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`ensurepip` environment isolation for subprocess running ``pip``.

..

.. bpo: 45924
.. date: 2021-12-27-15-32-15
.. nonce: 0ZpHX2
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`asyncio` incorrect traceback when future's exception is raised
multiple times. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. bpo: 34828
.. date: 2018-09-28-22-18-03
.. nonce: 5Zyi_S
.. section: Library

:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.iterdump` now handles databases that use
``AUTOINCREMENT`` in one or more tables.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-08-42-05
.. gh-issue: 94321
.. nonce: pmCIPb
.. section: Documentation

Document the :pep:`246` style protocol type
:class:`sqlite3.PrepareProtocol`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-19-18-18-22
.. gh-issue: 86128
.. nonce: 39DDTD
.. section: Documentation

Document a limitation in ThreadPoolExecutor where its exit handler is
executed before any handlers in atexit.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-10-10-59
.. gh-issue: 61162
.. nonce: 1ypkG8
.. section: Documentation

Clarify :mod:`sqlite3` behavior when
:ref:`sqlite3-connection-context-manager`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-12-12-49
.. gh-issue: 87260
.. nonce: epyI7D
.. section: Documentation

Align :mod:`sqlite3` argument specs with the actual implementation.

..

.. date: 2022-05-29-21-22-54
.. gh-issue: 86986
.. nonce: lFXw8j
.. section: Documentation

The minimum Sphinx version required to build the documentation is now 3.2.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-14-51-25
.. gh-issue: 88831
.. nonce: 5Cccr5
.. section: Documentation

Augmented documentation of asyncio.create_task(). Clarified the need to keep
strong references to tasks and added a code snippet detailing how to do
this.

..

.. bpo: 47161
.. date: 2022-03-30-17-56-01
.. nonce: gesHfS
.. section: Documentation

Document that :class:`pathlib.PurePath` does not collapse initial double
slashes because they denote UNC paths.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-15-22-19
.. gh-issue: 95280
.. nonce: h8HvbP
.. section: Tests

Fix problem with ``test_ssl`` ``test_get_ciphers`` on systems that require
perfect forward secrecy (PFS) ciphers.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-20-19-05
.. gh-issue: 95212
.. nonce: fHiU4e
.. section: Tests

Make multiprocessing test case ``test_shared_memory_recreate``
parallel-safe.

..

.. date: 2022-07-05-17-53-13
.. gh-issue: 91330
.. nonce: Qys5IL
.. section: Tests

Added more tests for :mod:`dataclasses` to cover behavior with data
descriptor-based fields.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-21-27-20
.. gh-issue: 94208
.. nonce: VR6HX-
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl`` is now checking for supported TLS version and protocols in more
tests.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-15-20-09
.. gh-issue: 93951
.. nonce: CW1Vv4
.. section: Tests

In test_bdb.StateTestCase.test_skip, avoid including auxiliary importers.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-13-55-11
.. gh-issue: 93957
.. nonce: X4ovYV
.. section: Tests

Provide nicer error reporting from subprocesses in
test_venv.EnsurePipTest.test_with_pip.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-16-26-04
.. gh-issue: 57539
.. nonce: HxWgYO
.. section: Tests

Increase calendar test coverage for
:meth:`calendar.LocaleTextCalendar.formatweekday`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-23-00-35
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: Y-vrWj
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``test_zipimport.py``

..

.. bpo: 47016
.. date: 2022-03-14-23-28-17
.. nonce: K-t2QX
.. section: Tests

Create a GitHub Actions workflow for verifying bundled pip and setuptools.
Patch by Illia Volochii and Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-02-45-44
.. gh-issue: 94841
.. nonce: lLRTdf
.. section: Build

Fix the possible performance regression of :c:func:`PyObject_Free` compiled
with MSVC version 1932.

..

.. bpo: 45816
.. date: 2021-11-16-14-44-06
.. nonce: nbdmVK
.. section: Build

Python now supports building with Visual Studio 2022 (MSVC v143, VS Version
17.0). Patch by Jeremiah Vivian.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-16-18-32
.. gh-issue: 90844
.. nonce: vwITT3
.. section: Windows

Allow virtual environments to correctly launch when they have spaces in the
path.

..

.. date: 2022-05-16-11-45-06
.. gh-issue: 92841
.. nonce: NQx107
.. section: Windows

:mod:`asyncio` no longer throws ``RuntimeError: Event loop is closed`` on
interpreter exit after asynchronous socket activity. Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. bpo: 42658
.. date: 2022-03-20-15-47-35
.. nonce: 16eXtb
.. section: Windows

Support native Windows case-insensitive path comparisons by using
``LCMapStringEx`` instead of :func:`str.lower` in :func:`ntpath.normcase`.
Add ``LCMapStringEx`` to the :mod:`_winapi` module.

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-22-15-14
.. gh-issue: 95511
.. nonce: WX6PmB
.. section: IDLE

Fix the Shell context menu copy-with-prompts bug of copying an extra line
when one selects whole lines.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-15-10-39
.. gh-issue: 95471
.. nonce: z3scVG
.. section: IDLE

In the Edit menu, move ``Select All`` and add a new separator.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-11-08-52
.. gh-issue: 95411
.. nonce: dazlqH
.. section: IDLE

Enable using IDLE's module browser with .pyw files.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-18-56-57
.. gh-issue: 89610
.. nonce: hcosiM
.. section: IDLE

Add .pyi as a recognized extension for IDLE on macOS.    This allows opening
stub files by double clicking on them in the Finder.

..

.. date: 2022-07-04-01-37-42
.. gh-issue: 94538
.. nonce: 1rgy1Y
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix Argument Clinic output to custom file destinations. Patch by Erlend E.
Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-22-47-11
.. gh-issue: 94430
.. nonce: hdov8L
.. section: Tools/Demos

Allow parameters named ``module`` and ``self`` with custom C names in
Argument Clinic. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-18-21-40
.. gh-issue: 94930
.. nonce: gPFGDL
.. section: C API

Fix ``SystemError`` raised when :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords` is
used with ``#`` in ``(...)`` but without ``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN`` defined.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-14-57-23
.. gh-issue: 94864
.. nonce: Pb41ab
.. section: C API

Fix ``PyArg_Parse*`` with deprecated format units "u" and "Z". It returned 1
(success) when warnings are turned into exceptions.
