.. date: 2024-05-29-17-05-28
.. gh-issue: 119690
.. nonce: U6RMtm
.. release date: 2024-09-07
.. section: Windows

Fixes data type confusion in audit events raised by ``_winapi.CreateFile``
and ``_winapi.CreateNamedPipe``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-01-58-22
.. gh-issue: 116773
.. nonce: H2UldY
.. section: Windows

Fix instances of ``<_overlapped.Overlapped object at 0xXXX> still has
pending operation at deallocation, the process may crash``.

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-17-06-01
.. gh-issue: 112769
.. nonce: kdLJmS
.. section: Tests

The tests now correctly compare zlib version when
:const:`zlib.ZLIB_RUNTIME_VERSION` contains non-integer suffixes. For
example zlib-ng defines the version as ``1.3.0.zlib-ng``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-24-23-49-25
.. gh-issue: 117187
.. nonce: eMLT5n
.. section: Tests

Fix XML tests for vanilla Expat <2.6.0.

..

.. date: 2022-12-23-13-29-55
.. gh-issue: 100454
.. nonce: 3no0cW
.. section: Tests

Fix SSL tests CI for OpenSSL 3.1+

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-12-41-35
.. gh-issue: 123678
.. nonce: N41y9n
.. section: Security

Upgrade libexpat to 2.6.3

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-13-14-38
.. gh-issue: 121957
.. nonce: FYkcOt
.. section: Security

Fixed missing audit events around interactive use of Python, now also
properly firing for ``python -i``, as well as for ``python -m asyncio``. The
event in question is ``cpython.run_stdin``.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-13-11-28
.. gh-issue: 122133
.. nonce: 0mPeta
.. section: Security

Authenticate the socket connection for the ``socket.socketpair()`` fallback
on platforms where ``AF_UNIX`` is not available like Windows.

Patch by Gregory P. Smith <greg@krypto.org> and Seth Larson
<seth@python.org>. Reported by Ellie <el@horse64.org>

..

.. date: 2024-07-02-13-39-20
.. gh-issue: 121285
.. nonce: hrl-yI
.. section: Security

Remove backtracking from tarfile header parsing for ``hdrcharset``, PAX, and
GNU sparse headers.

..

.. date: 2024-05-01-20-57-09
.. gh-issue: 118486
.. nonce: K44KJG
.. section: Security

:func:`os.mkdir` on Windows now accepts *mode* of ``0o700`` to restrict the
new directory to the current user. This fixes CVE-2024-4030 affecting
:func:`tempfile.mkdtemp` in scenarios where the base temporary directory is
more permissive than the default.

..

.. date: 2024-03-27-13-50-02
.. gh-issue: 116741
.. nonce: ZoGryG
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.6.2

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-14-05-02
.. gh-issue: 123693
.. nonce: dNW1IF
.. section: Library

Use platform-agnostic behavior when computing ``zipfile.Path.name``.

..

.. date: 2024-08-26-13-45-20
.. gh-issue: 123270
.. nonce: gXHvNJ
.. section: Library

Applied a more surgical fix for malformed payloads in :class:`zipfile.Path`
causing infinite loops (gh-122905) without breaking contents using
legitimate characters.

..

.. date: 2024-08-16-19-13-21
.. gh-issue: 123067
.. nonce: Nx9O4R
.. section: Library

Fix quadratic complexity in parsing ``"``-quoted cookie values with
backslashes by :mod:`http.cookies`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-11-14-08-04
.. gh-issue: 122905
.. nonce: 7tDsxA
.. section: Library

:class:`zipfile.Path` objects now sanitize names from the zipfile.

..

.. date: 2024-07-27-16-10-41
.. gh-issue: 121650
.. nonce: nf6oc9
.. section: Library

:mod:`email` headers with embedded newlines are now quoted on output. The
:mod:`~email.generator` will now refuse to serialize (write) headers that
are unsafely folded or delimited; see
:attr:`~email.policy.Policy.verify_generated_headers`. (Contributed by Bas
Bloemsaat and Petr Viktorin in :gh:`121650`.)

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-01-38-44
.. gh-issue: 113171
.. nonce: VFnObz
.. section: Library

Fixed various false positives and false negatives in

* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_private` (see these docs for details)
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_global`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_private`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_global`

Also in the corresponding :class:`ipaddress.IPv4Network` and
:class:`ipaddress.IPv6Network` attributes.

..

.. date: 2023-10-20-15-28-08
.. gh-issue: 102988
.. nonce: dStNO7
.. section: Library

:func:`email.utils.getaddresses` and :func:`email.utils.parseaddr` now
return ``('', '')`` 2-tuples in more situations where invalid email
addresses are encountered instead of potentially inaccurate values. Add
optional *strict* parameter to these two functions: use ``strict=False`` to
get the old behavior, accept malformed inputs. ``getattr(email.utils,
'supports_strict_parsing', False)`` can be use to check if the *strict*
paramater is available. Patch by Thomas Dwyer and Victor Stinner to improve
the CVE-2023-27043 fix.

..

.. date: 2019-08-27-01-16-50
.. gh-issue: 67693
.. nonce: 4NIAiy
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`urllib.parse.urlunparse` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlunsplit` for
URIs with path starting with multiple slashes and no authority. Based on
patch by Ashwin Ramaswami.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-18-20-11
.. gh-issue: 112275
.. nonce: W_iMiB
.. section: Core and Builtins

A deadlock involving ``pystate.c``'s ``HEAD_LOCK`` in ``posixmodule.c`` at
fork is now fixed. Patch by ChuBoning based on previous Python 3.12 fix by
Victor Stinner.
