.. bpo: 46968
.. date: 2022-03-17-14-22-23
.. nonce: 4gz4NA
.. release date: 2022-03-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check for the existence of the "sys/auxv.h" header in :mod:`faulthandler` to
avoid compilation problems in systems where this header doesn't exist. Patch
by Pablo Galindo

..

.. bpo: 23691
.. date: 2022-03-20-22-13-24
.. nonce: Nc2TrW
.. section: Library

Protect the :func:`re.finditer` iterator from re-entering.

..

.. bpo: 42369
.. date: 2022-03-19-19-56-04
.. nonce: Ok828t
.. section: Library

Fix thread safety of :meth:`zipfile._SharedFile.tell` to avoid a
"zipfile.BadZipFile: Bad CRC-32 for file" exception when reading a
:class:`ZipFile` from multiple threads.

..

.. bpo: 38256
.. date: 2022-03-19-15-54-41
.. nonce: FoMbjE
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`binascii.crc32` when it is compiled to use zlib'c crc32 to work
properly on inputs 4+GiB in length instead of returning the wrong result.
The workaround prior to this was to always feed the function data in
increments smaller than 4GiB or to just call the zlib module function.

..

.. bpo: 39394
.. date: 2022-03-19-13-38-29
.. nonce: 7j6WL6
.. section: Library

A warning about inline flags not at the start of the regular expression now
contains the position of the flag.

..

.. bpo: 47061
.. date: 2022-03-18-13-30-40
.. nonce: etLHK5
.. section: Library

Deprecate the various modules listed by :pep:`594`:

aifc, asynchat, asyncore, audioop, cgi, cgitb, chunk, crypt, imghdr, msilib,
nntplib, nis, ossaudiodev, pipes, smtpd, sndhdr, spwd, sunau, telnetlib, uu,
xdrlib

..

.. bpo: 2604
.. date: 2022-03-16-18-25-19
.. nonce: jeopdL
.. section: Library

Fix bug where doctests using globals would fail when run multiple times.

..

.. bpo: 45997
.. date: 2022-03-15-18-32-12
.. nonce: 4n2aVU
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.Semaphore` re-aquiring FIFO order.

..

.. bpo: 47022
.. date: 2022-03-15-09-29-52
.. nonce: uaEDcI
.. section: Library

The :mod:`asynchat`, :mod:`asyncore` and  :mod:`smtpd` modules have been
deprecated since at least Python 3.6. Their documentation and deprecation
warnings and have now been updated to note they will removed in Python 3.12
(:pep:`594`).

..

.. bpo: 46421
.. date: 2022-01-18-01-29-38
.. nonce: 9LdmNr
.. section: Library

Fix a unittest issue where if the command was invoked as ``python -m
unittest`` and the filename(s) began with a dot (.), a ``ValueError`` is
returned.

..

.. bpo: 40296
.. date: 2021-12-25-14-13-14
.. nonce: p0YVGB
.. section: Library

Fix supporting generic aliases in :mod:`pydoc`.
