.. date: 2024-02-18-03-14-40
.. gh-issue: 115398
.. nonce: tzvxH8
.. release date: 2024-03-19
.. section: Security

Allow controlling Expat >=2.6.0 reparse deferral (CVE-2023-52425) by adding
five new methods:

* :meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.XMLParser.flush`
* :meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.XMLPullParser.flush`
* :meth:`xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.GetReparseDeferralEnabled`
* :meth:`xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetReparseDeferralEnabled`
* :meth:`xml.sax.expatreader.ExpatParser.flush`

..

.. date: 2024-02-13-15-14-39
.. gh-issue: 115399
.. nonce: xT-scP
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.6.0

..

.. date: 2024-01-26-22-14-09
.. gh-issue: 114572
.. nonce: t1QMQD
.. section: Security

:meth:`ssl.SSLContext.cert_store_stats` and
:meth:`ssl.SSLContext.get_ca_certs` now correctly lock access to the
certificate store, when the :class:`ssl.SSLContext` is shared across
multiple threads.

..

.. date: 2024-01-02-19-52-23
.. gh-issue: 113659
.. nonce: DkmnQc
.. section: Security

Skip ``.pth`` files with names starting with a dot or hidden file attribute.

..

.. date: 2023-10-27-19-38-33
.. gh-issue: 102388
.. nonce: vd5YUZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug where ``iso2022_jp_3`` and ``iso2022_jp_2004`` codecs read out of
bounds

..

.. date: 2024-02-09-19-41-48
.. gh-issue: 115197
.. nonce: 20wkWH
.. section: Library

``urllib.request`` no longer resolves the hostname before checking it
against the system's proxy bypass list on macOS and Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-02-08-14-21-28
.. gh-issue: 115133
.. nonce: ycl4ko
.. section: Library

Fix tests for :class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.XMLPullParser` with Expat
2.6.0.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-16-09-59
.. gh-issue: 81194
.. nonce: FFad1c
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :func:`socket.if_indextoname` with specific value (UINT_MAX).
Fix an integer overflow in :func:`socket.if_indextoname` on 64-bit
non-Windows platforms.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-13-15-51
.. gh-issue: 109858
.. nonce: 43e2dg
.. section: Library

Protect :mod:`zipfile` from "quoted-overlap" zipbomb. It now raises
BadZipFile when try to read an entry that overlaps with other entry or
central directory.

..

.. date: 2022-12-01-16-57-44
.. gh-issue: 91133
.. nonce: LKMVCV
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :class:`tempfile.TemporaryDirectory` cleanup, which now no
longer dereferences symlinks when working around file system permission
errors.

..

.. date: 2024-02-14-20-17-04
.. gh-issue: 115399
.. nonce: fb9a0R
.. section: Documentation

Document CVE-2023-52425 of Expat <2.6.0 under "XML vulnerabilities".

..

.. date: 2024-02-01-14-35-05
.. gh-issue: 111239
.. nonce: SO7SUF
.. section: Windows

Update Windows builds to use zlib v1.3.1.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-10-35-29
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: GmuzGZ
.. section: Windows

Windows builds now use OpenSSL 1.1.1w. Note that OpenSSL 1.1 has reached its
end of life and no future fixes will be made, and this version of Python is
no longer receiving maintenance fixes and will not be updated to OpenSSL
3.0.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-23-31-54
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: sUUYY8
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 3.0.11 and multissltests to use
1.1.1w, 3.0.11, and 3.1.3.
