.. date: 2023-02-06-20-13-36
.. gh-issue: 92173
.. nonce: RQE0mk
.. release date: 2023-02-07
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the ``defs`` and ``kwdefs`` arguments to :c:func:`PyEval_EvalCodeEx` and
a reference leak in that function.

..

.. date: 2023-01-30-08-59-47
.. gh-issue: 101400
.. nonce: Di_ZFm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix wrong lineno in exception message on :keyword:`continue` or
:keyword:`break` which are not in a loop. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-01-28-20-31-42
.. gh-issue: 101372
.. nonce: 8BcpCC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`~unicodedata.is_normalized` to properly handle the UCD 3.2.0
cases. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-01-15-03-26-04
.. gh-issue: 101046
.. nonce: g2CM4S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible memory leak in the parser when raising :exc:`MemoryError`.
Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-01-14-17-03-08
.. gh-issue: 101037
.. nonce: 9ATNuf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential memory underallocation issue for instances of :class:`int`
subclasses with value zero.

..

.. date: 2023-01-11-22-52-19
.. gh-issue: 100942
.. nonce: ontOy_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed segfault in property.getter/setter/deleter that occurred when a
property subclass overrode the ``__new__`` method to return a non-property
instance.

..

.. date: 2023-01-10-14-11-17
.. gh-issue: 100892
.. nonce: qfBVYI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix race while iterating over thread states in clearing
:class:`threading.local`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-01-06-02-02-11
.. gh-issue: 100776
.. nonce: pP8xux
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix misleading default value in :func:`input`'s ``__text_signature__``.

..

.. date: 2023-01-01-15-59-48
.. gh-issue: 100637
.. nonce: M2n6Kg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`int.__sizeof__` calculation to include the 1 element ob_digit
array for 0 and False.

..

.. date: 2022-12-31-23-32-09
.. gh-issue: 100649
.. nonce: C0fY4S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update the native_thread_id field of PyThreadState after fork.

..

.. date: 2022-12-20-16-14-19
.. gh-issue: 100374
.. nonce: YRrVHT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect result and delay in :func:`socket.getfqdn`. Patch by Dominic
Socular.

..

.. date: 2022-12-12-01-05-16
.. gh-issue: 99110
.. nonce: 1JqtIg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Initialize frame->previous in frameobject.c to fix a segmentation fault when
accessing frames created by :c:func:`PyFrame_New`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-06-22-24-01
.. gh-issue: 100050
.. nonce: lcrPqQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Honor existing errors obtained when searching for mismatching parentheses in
the tokenizer. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. bpo: 32782
.. date: 2018-02-06-23-21-13
.. nonce: EJVSfR
.. section: Core and Builtins

``ctypes`` arrays of length 0 now report a correct itemsize when a
``memoryview`` is constructed from them, rather than always giving a value
of 0.

..

.. date: 2023-02-05-14-39-49
.. gh-issue: 101541
.. nonce: Mo3ppp
.. section: Library

[Enum] - fix psuedo-flag creation

..

.. date: 2023-01-25-18-07-20
.. gh-issue: 101326
.. nonce: KL4SFv
.. section: Library

Fix regression when passing ``None`` as second or third argument to
``FutureIter.throw``.

..

.. date: 2023-01-21-16-50-22
.. gh-issue: 100795
.. nonce: NPMZf7
.. section: Library

Avoid potential unexpected ``freeaddrinfo`` call (double free) in
:mod:`socket` when when a libc ``getaddrinfo()`` implementation leaves
garbage in an output pointer when returning an error. Original patch by
Sergey G. Brester.

..

.. date: 2023-01-20-10-46-59
.. gh-issue: 101143
.. nonce: hJo8hu
.. section: Library

Remove unused references to :class:`~asyncio.TimerHandle` in
``asyncio.base_events.BaseEventLoop._add_callback``.

..

.. date: 2023-01-18-17-58-50
.. gh-issue: 101144
.. nonce: FHd8Un
.. section: Library

Make :func:`zipfile.Path.open` and :func:`zipfile.Path.read_text` also
accept ``encoding`` as a positional argument. This was the behavior in
Python 3.9 and earlier.  3.10 introduced a regression where supplying it as
a positional argument would lead to a :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. date: 2023-01-14-12-58-21
.. gh-issue: 101015
.. nonce: stWFid
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`typing.get_type_hints` on ``'*tuple[...]'`` and ``*tuple[...]``.
It must not drop the ``Unpack`` part.

..

.. date: 2023-01-12-01-18-13
.. gh-issue: 100573
.. nonce: KDskqo
.. section: Library

Fix a Windows :mod:`asyncio` bug with named pipes where a client doing
``os.stat()`` on the pipe would cause an error in the server that disabled
serving future requests.

..

.. date: 2023-01-07-15-13-47
.. gh-issue: 100805
.. nonce: 05rBz9
.. section: Library

Modify :func:`random.choice` implementation to once again work with NumPy
arrays.

..

.. date: 2023-01-04-22-10-31
.. gh-issue: 90104
.. nonce: yZk5EX
.. section: Library

Avoid RecursionError on ``repr`` if a dataclass field definition has a
cyclic reference.

..

.. date: 2023-01-04-14-42-59
.. gh-issue: 100750
.. nonce: iFJs5Y
.. section: Library

pass encoding kwarg to subprocess in platform

..

.. date: 2023-01-04-12-58-59
.. gh-issue: 100689
.. nonce: Ce0ITG
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :mod:`pyexpat` by statically allocating ``PyExpat_CAPI``
capsule.

..

.. date: 2023-01-04-09-53-38
.. gh-issue: 100740
.. nonce: -j5UjI
.. section: Library

Fix ``unittest.mock.Mock`` not respecting the spec for attribute names
prefixed with ``assert``.

..

.. date: 2022-12-30-07-49-08
.. gh-issue: 86508
.. nonce: nGZDzC
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`asyncio.open_connection` to skip binding to local addresses of
different family. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-12-24-08-42-05
.. gh-issue: 100287
.. nonce: n0oEuG
.. section: Library

Fix the interaction of :func:`unittest.mock.seal` with
:class:`unittest.mock.AsyncMock`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-23-21-02-43
.. gh-issue: 100474
.. nonce: gppA4U
.. section: Library

:mod:`http.server` now checks that an index page is actually a regular file
before trying to serve it.  This avoids issues with directories named
``index.html``.

..

.. date: 2022-12-21-18-29-24
.. gh-issue: 100160
.. nonce: isBmL5
.. section: Library

Remove any deprecation warnings in :func:`asyncio.get_event_loop`. They are
deferred to Python 3.12.

..

.. date: 2022-12-19-23-19-26
.. gh-issue: 96290
.. nonce: qFjsi6
.. section: Library

Fix handling of partial and invalid UNC drives in ``ntpath.splitdrive()``,
and in ``ntpath.normpath()`` on non-Windows systems. Paths such as
'\\server' and '\\' are now considered by ``splitdrive()`` to contain only a
drive, and consequently are not modified by ``normpath()`` on non-Windows
systems. The behaviour of ``normpath()`` on Windows systems is unaffected,
as native OS APIs are used. Patch by Eryk Sun, with contributions by Barney
Gale.

..

.. date: 2022-12-19-20-54-04
.. gh-issue: 78878
.. nonce: JrkYqJ
.. section: Library

Fix crash when creating an instance of :class:`!_ctypes.CField`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-11-14-38-59
.. gh-issue: 99952
.. nonce: IYGLzr
.. section: Library

Fix a reference undercounting issue in :class:`ctypes.Structure` with
``from_param()`` results larger than a C pointer.

..

.. date: 2022-12-10-08-36-07
.. gh-issue: 100133
.. nonce: g-zQlp
.. section: Library

Fix regression in :mod:`asyncio` where a subprocess would sometimes lose
data received from pipe.

..

.. date: 2022-12-08-06-18-06
.. gh-issue: 100098
.. nonce: uBvPlp
.. section: Library

Fix ``tuple`` subclasses being cast to ``tuple`` when used as enum values.

..

.. date: 2022-12-03-20-06-16
.. gh-issue: 98778
.. nonce: t5U9uc
.. section: Library

Update :exc:`~urllib.error.HTTPError` to be initialized properly, even if
the ``fp`` is ``None``. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2022-11-21-16-24-01
.. gh-issue: 83035
.. nonce: qZIujU
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`inspect.getsource` handling of decorator calls with nested
parentheses.

..

.. date: 2022-11-20-11-59-54
.. gh-issue: 99576
.. nonce: ZD7jU6
.. section: Library

Fix ``.save()`` method for ``LWPCookieJar`` and ``MozillaCookieJar``: saved
file was not truncated on repeated save.

..

.. date: 2022-11-13-15-32-19
.. gh-issue: 99433
.. nonce: Ys6y0A
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`doctest` failure on :class:`types.MethodWrapperType` in modules.

..

.. date: 2022-11-08-15-54-43
.. gh-issue: 99240
.. nonce: MhYwcz
.. section: Library

Fix double-free bug in Argument Clinic ``str_converter`` by extracting
memory clean up to a new ``post_parsing`` section.

..

.. date: 2022-11-08-11-18-51
.. gh-issue: 64490
.. nonce: VcBgrN
.. section: Library

Fix refcount error when arguments are packed to tuple in Argument Clinic.

..

.. date: 2022-10-28-07-24-34
.. gh-issue: 85267
.. nonce: xUy_Wm
.. section: Library

Several improvements to :func:`inspect.signature`'s handling of
``__text_signature``. - Fixes a case where :func:`inspect.signature` dropped
parameters - Fixes a case where :func:`inspect.signature` raised
:exc:`tokenize.TokenError` - Allows :func:`inspect.signature` to understand
defaults involving binary operations of constants -
:func:`inspect.signature` is documented as only raising :exc:`TypeError` or
:exc:`ValueError`, but sometimes raised :exc:`RuntimeError`. These cases now
raise :exc:`ValueError` - Removed a dead code path

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-10-02-19
.. gh-issue: 95882
.. nonce: FsUr72
.. section: Library

Fix a 3.11 regression in :func:`~contextlib.asynccontextmanager`, which
caused it to propagate exceptions with incorrect tracebacks and fix a 3.11
regression in  :func:`~contextlib.contextmanager`, which caused it to
propagate exceptions with incorrect tracebacks for :exc:`StopIteration`.

..

.. bpo: 44817
.. date: 2021-08-03-05-31-00
.. nonce: wOW_Qn
.. section: Library

Ignore WinError 53 (ERROR_BAD_NETPATH), 65 (ERROR_NETWORK_ACCESS_DENIED) and
161 (ERROR_BAD_PATHNAME) when using ntpath.realpath().

..

.. bpo: 40447
.. date: 2020-05-03-12-55-55
.. nonce: oKR0Lj
.. section: Library

Accept :class:`os.PathLike` (such as :class:`pathlib.Path`) in the
``stripdir`` arguments of :meth:`compileall.compile_file` and
:meth:`compileall.compile_dir`.

..

.. bpo: 36880
.. date: 2019-05-13-11-37-30
.. nonce: ZgBgH0
.. section: Library

Fix a reference counting issue when a :mod:`ctypes` callback with return
type :class:`~ctypes.py_object` returns ``None``, which could cause crashes.

..

.. date: 2022-12-30-00-42-23
.. gh-issue: 100616
.. nonce: eu80ij
.. section: Documentation

Document existing ``attr`` parameter to :func:`curses.window.vline` function
in :mod:`curses`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-23-21-42-26
.. gh-issue: 100472
.. nonce: NNixfO
.. section: Documentation

Remove claim in documentation that the ``stripdir``, ``prependdir`` and
``limit_sl_dest`` parameters of :func:`compileall.compile_dir` and
:func:`compileall.compile_file` could be :class:`bytes`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-02-17-08-08
.. gh-issue: 99931
.. nonce: wC46hE
.. section: Documentation

Use `sphinxext-opengraph <https://sphinxext-opengraph.readthedocs.io/>`__ to
generate `OpenGraph metadata <https://ogp.me/>`__.

..

.. date: 2023-02-04-17-24-33
.. gh-issue: 101334
.. nonce: _yOqwg
.. section: Tests

``test_tarfile`` has been updated to pass when run as a high UID.

..

.. date: 2022-12-23-13-29-55
.. gh-issue: 100454
.. nonce: 3no0cW
.. section: Tests

Start running SSL tests with OpenSSL 3.1.0-beta1.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-15-49-14
.. gh-issue: 96002
.. nonce: 4UE9UE
.. section: Tests

Add functional test for Argument Clinic.

..

.. date: 2023-02-02-23-43-46
.. gh-issue: 101522
.. nonce: lnUDta
.. section: Build

Allow overriding Windows dependencies versions and paths using MSBuild
properties.

..

.. date: 2023-02-03-17-53-06
.. gh-issue: 101543
.. nonce: cORAT4
.. section: Windows

Ensure the install path in the registry is only used when the standard
library hasn't been located in any other way.

..

.. date: 2023-01-31-16-50-07
.. gh-issue: 101467
.. nonce: ye9t-L
.. section: Windows

The ``py.exe`` launcher now correctly filters when only a single runtime is
installed. It also correctly handles prefix matches on tags so that ``-3.1``
does not match ``3.11``, but would still match ``3.1-32``.

..

.. date: 2023-01-18-18-25-18
.. gh-issue: 101135
.. nonce: HF9VlG
.. section: Windows

Restore ability to launch older 32-bit versions from the :file:`py.exe`
launcher when both 32-bit and 64-bit installs of the same version are
available.

..

.. date: 2023-01-17-18-17-58
.. gh-issue: 82052
.. nonce: mWyysT
.. section: Windows

Fixed an issue where writing more than 32K of Unicode output to the console
screen in one go can result in mojibake.

..

.. date: 2023-01-11-16-28-09
.. gh-issue: 100320
.. nonce: 2DU2it
.. section: Windows

Ensures the ``PythonPath`` registry key from an install is used when
launching from a different copy of Python that relies on an existing install
to provide a copy of its modules and standard library.

..

.. date: 2023-01-11-14-42-11
.. gh-issue: 100247
.. nonce: YfEmSz
.. section: Windows

Restores support for the :file:`py.exe` launcher finding shebang commands in
its configuration file using the full command name.

..

.. date: 2023-01-09-23-03-57
.. gh-issue: 100180
.. nonce: b5phrg
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to OpenSSL 1.1.1s

..

.. bpo: 43984
.. date: 2021-05-02-15-29-33
.. nonce: U92jiv
.. section: Windows

:meth:`winreg.SetValueEx` now leaves the target value untouched in the case
of conversion errors. Previously, ``-1`` would be written in case of such
errors.

..

.. date: 2023-01-09-22-04-21
.. gh-issue: 100180
.. nonce: WVhCny
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to OpenSSL 1.1.1s

..

.. bpo: 45256
.. date: 2022-12-29-19-22-11
.. nonce: a0ee_H
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a bug that caused an :exc:`AttributeError` to be raised in
``python-gdb.py`` when ``py-locals`` is used without a frame.

..

.. date: 2022-12-19-10-08-53
.. gh-issue: 100342
.. nonce: qDFlQG
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add missing ``NULL`` check for possible allocation failure in ``*args``
parsing in Argument Clinic.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-09-58-15
.. gh-issue: 64490
.. nonce: PjwhM4
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic varargs bugfixes

* Fix out-of-bounds error in :c:func:`!_PyArg_UnpackKeywordsWithVararg`.
* Fix incorrect check which allowed more than one varargs in clinic.py.
* Fix miscalculation of ``noptargs`` in generated code.
* Do not generate ``noptargs`` when there is a vararg argument and no optional argument.

..

.. date: 2022-11-30-16-39-22
.. gh-issue: 99240
.. nonce: 67nAX-
.. section: C API

In argument parsing, after deallocating newly allocated memory, reset its
pointer to NULL.
