.. date: 2022-07-23-19-16-25
.. gh-issue: 93351
.. nonce: 0Jyvu-
.. release date: 2022-07-25
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`ast.AST` node positions are now validated when provided to
:func:`compile` and other related functions. If invalid positions are
detected, a :exc:`ValueError` will be raised.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-12-53-34
.. gh-issue: 94438
.. nonce: hNqACc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that caused extended opcode arguments and some conditional pops
to be ignored when calculating valid jump targets for assignments to the
``f_lineno`` attribute of frame objects. In some cases, this could cause
inconsistent internal state, resulting in a hard crash of the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-19-19-20
.. gh-issue: 95060
.. nonce: 4xdT1f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Undocumented ``PyCode_Addr2Location`` function now properly returns when
``addrq`` argument is less than zero.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-17-54-52
.. gh-issue: 95113
.. nonce: NnSLpT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace all ``EXTENDED_ARG_QUICK`` instructions with basic
:opcode:`EXTENDED_ARG` instructions in unquickened code. Consumers of
non-adaptive bytecode should be able to handle extended arguments the same
way they were handled in CPython 3.10 and older.

..

.. date: 2022-07-20-13-46-01
.. gh-issue: 91409
.. nonce: dhL8Zo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect source location info caused by certain optimizations in the
bytecode compiler.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-16-30-59
.. gh-issue: 94036
.. nonce: _6Utkm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect source location info for some multi-line attribute accesses
and method calls.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-14-19-21
.. gh-issue: 94739
.. nonce: NQJQi7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow jumping within, out of, and across exception handlers in the debugger.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-05-10-29
.. gh-issue: 94949
.. nonce: OsZ7_s
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse parenthesized context managers when
passed ``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 9)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-04-48-34
.. gh-issue: 94947
.. nonce: df9gUw
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse assignment expressions when passed
``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 8)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-15-54-29
.. gh-issue: 91256
.. nonce: z7i7Q5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensures the program name is known for help text during interpreter startup.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-08-14-17
.. gh-issue: 94869
.. nonce: eRwMsX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the column offsets for some expressions in multi-line f-strings
:mod:`ast` nodes. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-22-16-08
.. gh-issue: 94822
.. nonce: zRRzBN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where lookups of metaclass descriptors may be ignored when an
identically-named attribute also exists on the class itself.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-16-15-04
.. gh-issue: 91153
.. nonce: HiBmtt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where a :class:`bytearray` item assignment could crash if it's
resized by the new value's :meth:`__index__` method.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-10-07-53
.. gh-issue: 90699
.. nonce: x3aG9m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference counting bug in :meth:`bool.__repr__`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-59-02
.. gh-issue: 95087
.. nonce: VvqXkN
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError in parsing invalid date in the :mod:`email` module.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-00-06
.. gh-issue: 95199
.. nonce: -5A64k
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled setuptools to 63.2.0.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-09-15-35
.. gh-issue: 95194
.. nonce: ERVmqG
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled pip to 22.2.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-21-18-17
.. gh-issue: 95132
.. nonce: n9anlw
.. section: Library

Fix a :mod:`sqlite3` regression where ``*args`` and ``**kwds`` were
incorrectly relayed from :py:func:`~sqlite3.connect` to the
:class:`~sqlite3.Connection` factory. The regression was introduced in
3.11a1 with PR 24421 (:gh:`85128`). Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.`

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-17-19-57
.. gh-issue: 93157
.. nonce: RXByAk
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`fileinput` module didn't support ``errors`` option when
``inplace`` is true.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-19-55-49
.. gh-issue: 95105
.. nonce: BIX2Km
.. section: Library

:meth:`wsgiref.types.InputStream.__iter__` should return
``Iterator[bytes]``, not ``Iterable[bytes]``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-08-13-51
.. gh-issue: 94857
.. nonce: 9_KvZJ
.. section: Library

Fix refleak in ``_io.TextIOWrapper.reconfigure``. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-00-43-52
.. gh-issue: 94821
.. nonce: e17ghU
.. section: Library

Fix binding of unix socket to empty address on Linux to use an available
address from the abstract namespace, instead of "\0".

..

.. date: 2022-06-26-10-59-15
.. gh-issue: 89988
.. nonce: K8rnmt
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in :class:`pickle.Pickler` when looking up
:attr:`dispatch_table`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. bpo: 47025
.. date: 2022-03-16-14-24-14
.. nonce: qtT3CE
.. section: Library

Drop support for :class:`bytes` on :attr:`sys.path`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-20-19-05
.. gh-issue: 95212
.. nonce: fHiU4e
.. section: Tests

Make multiprocessing test case ``test_shared_memory_recreate``
parallel-safe.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-11-13-26
.. gh-issue: 94847
.. nonce: s3Kr5p
.. section: Build

Fixed ``_decimal`` module build issue on GCC when compiling with LTO and
pydebug. Debug builds no longer force inlining of functions.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-02-45-44
.. gh-issue: 94841
.. nonce: lLRTdf
.. section: Build

Fix the possible performance regression of :c:func:`PyObject_Free` compiled
with MSVC version 1932.

..

.. date: 2022-07-13-10-13-10
.. gh-issue: 94801
.. nonce: 3xUB24
.. section: Build

``configure`` now uses custom flags like ``ZLIB_CFLAGS`` and ``ZLIB_LIBS``
when searching for headers and libraries.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-13-39-18
.. gh-issue: 94773
.. nonce: koHKm5
.. section: Build

``deepfreeze.py`` now supports code object with frozensets that contain
incompatible, unsortable types.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-16-18-32
.. gh-issue: 90844
.. nonce: vwITT3
.. section: Windows

Allow virtual environments to correctly launch when they have spaces in the
path.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-20-45-43
.. gh-issue: 94772
.. nonce: uNMmdG
.. section: Windows

Fix incorrect handling of shebang lines in py.exe launcher

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-15-54-27
.. gh-issue: 92678
.. nonce: ziZpxz
.. section: C API

Adds unstable C-API functions ``_PyObject_VisitManagedDict`` and
``_PyObject_ClearManagedDict`` to allow C extensions to allow the VM to
manage their object's dictionaries.

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-18-21-40
.. gh-issue: 94930
.. nonce: gPFGDL
.. section: C API

Fix ``SystemError`` raised when :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords` is
used with ``#`` in ``(...)`` but without ``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN`` defined.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-14-57-23
.. gh-issue: 94864
.. nonce: Pb41ab
.. section: C API

Fix ``PyArg_Parse*`` with deprecated format units "u" and "Z". It returned 1
(success) when warnings are turned into exceptions.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-17-39-32
.. gh-issue: 94731
.. nonce: 9CPJNU
.. section: C API

Python again uses C-style casts for most casting operations when compiled
with C++. This may trigger compiler warnings, if they are enabled with e.g.
``-Wold-style-cast`` or ``-Wzero-as-null-pointer-constant`` options for
``g++``.
