.. date: 2022-08-07-16-53-38
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: ch010gps
.. release date: 2022-09-11
.. section: Security

Converting between :class:`int` and :class:`str` in bases other than 2
(binary), 4, 8 (octal), 16 (hexadecimal), or 32 such as base 10 (decimal)
now raises a :exc:`ValueError` if the number of digits in string form is
above a limit to avoid potential denial of service attacks due to the
algorithmic complexity. This is a mitigation for `CVE-2020-10735
<https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2020-10735>`_.

This new limit can be configured or disabled by environment variable,
command line flag, or :mod:`sys` APIs. See the :ref:`integer string
conversion length limitation <int_max_str_digits>` documentation.  The
default limit is 4300 digits in string form.

Patch by Gregory P. Smith [Google] and Christian Heimes [Red Hat] with
feedback from Victor Stinner, Thomas Wouters, Steve Dower, Ned Deily, and
Mark Dickinson.

..

.. date: 2022-09-09-13-13-27
.. gh-issue: 96678
.. nonce: vMxi9F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix case of undefined behavior in ceval.c

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-13-38-37
.. gh-issue: 96641
.. nonce: wky0Fc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not expose ``KeyWrapper`` in :mod:`_functools`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-12-02-11
.. gh-issue: 96636
.. nonce: YvN-K6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that tracing, ``sys.setrace()``, is turned on immediately. In
pre-release versions of 3.11, some tracing events might have been lost when
turning on tracing in a ``__del__`` method or interrupt.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-16-54-49
.. gh-issue: 96572
.. nonce: 8DRsaW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix use after free in trace refs build mode. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-16-22-13
.. gh-issue: 96611
.. nonce: 14wIX8
.. section: Core and Builtins

When loading a file with invalid UTF-8 inside a multi-line string, a correct
SyntaxError is emitted.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-14-26-36
.. gh-issue: 96612
.. nonce: P4ZbeY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure that incomplete frames do not show up in tracemalloc traces.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-16-43-44
.. gh-issue: 96569
.. nonce: 9lmTCC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove two cases of undefined behavior, by adding NULL checks.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-15-07-25
.. gh-issue: 96582
.. nonce: HEsL5s
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible ``NULL`` pointer dereference in ``_PyThread_CurrentFrames``.
Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-28-10-51-19
.. gh-issue: 96352
.. nonce: jTLD2d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`AttributeError` missing ``name`` and ``obj`` attributes in
:meth:`object.__getattribute__`. Patch by Philip Georgi.

..

.. date: 2022-08-25-10-19-34
.. gh-issue: 96268
.. nonce: AbYrLB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Loading a file with invalid UTF-8 will now report the broken character at
the correct location.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-21-33-28
.. gh-issue: 96187
.. nonce: W_6SRG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug that caused ``_PyCode_GetExtra`` to return garbage for negative
indexes. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-06-51-17
.. gh-issue: 96071
.. nonce: mVgPAo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a deadlock in :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` when allocating new thread
state. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-18-13-47-59
.. gh-issue: 96046
.. nonce: 5Hqbka
.. section: Core and Builtins

:c:func:`PyType_Ready` now initializes ``ht_cached_keys`` and performs
additional checks to ensure that type objects are properly configured. This
avoids crashes in 3rd party packages that don't use regular API to create
new types.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-11-01-56
.. gh-issue: 95818
.. nonce: iClLdl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Skip over incomplete frames in :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetFrame`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-09-19-55
.. gh-issue: 95876
.. nonce: YpQfoV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix format string in ``_PyPegen_raise_error_known_location`` that can lead
to memory corruption on some 64bit systems. The function was building a
tuple with ``i`` (int) instead of ``n`` (Py_ssize_t) for Py_ssize_t
arguments.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-18-46-54
.. gh-issue: 95605
.. nonce: FbpCoG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix misleading contents of error message when converting an all-whitespace
string to :class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-04-34-56
.. gh-issue: 94996
.. nonce: dV564A
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse function definitions with
positional-only params when passed ``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 8)``.
Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-09-08-23-23-24
.. gh-issue: 96700
.. nonce: J0MQGK
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect error message in the :mod:`io` module.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-22-49-37
.. gh-issue: 96652
.. nonce: YqOKxI
.. section: Library

Fix the faulthandler implementation of ``faulthandler.register(signal,
chain=True)`` if the ``sigaction()`` function is not available: don't call
the previous signal handler if it's NULL. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-04-12-32-52
.. gh-issue: 68163
.. nonce: h6TJCc
.. section: Library

Correct conversion of :class:`numbers.Rational`'s to :class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-15-28-39
.. gh-issue: 96385
.. nonce: uLRTsf
.. section: Library

Fix ``TypeVarTuple.__typing_prepare_subst__``. ``TypeError`` was not raised
when using more than one ``TypeVarTuple``, like ``[*T, *V]`` in type alias
substitutions.

..

.. date: 2022-08-27-14-38-49
.. gh-issue: 90467
.. nonce: VOOB0p
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.streams.StreamReaderProtocol` to keep a strong reference
to the created task, so that it's not garbage collected

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-18-42-17
.. gh-issue: 96159
.. nonce: 3bFU39
.. section: Library

Fix a performance regression in logging TimedRotatingFileHandler. Only check
for special files when the rollover time has passed.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-13-54-20
.. gh-issue: 96175
.. nonce: bH7zGU
.. section: Library

Fix unused ``localName`` parameter in the ``Attr`` class in
:mod:`xml.dom.minidom`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-18-21-01
.. gh-issue: 96125
.. nonce: ODcF1Y
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect condition that causes ``sys.thread_info.name`` to be wrong on
pthread platforms.

..

.. date: 2022-08-18-14-53-53
.. gh-issue: 95463
.. nonce: GpP05c
.. section: Library

Remove an incompatible change from :issue:`28080` that caused a regression
that ignored the utf8 in ``ZipInfo.flag_bits``. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-18-52-17
.. gh-issue: 95899
.. nonce: _Bi4uG
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.Runner` to call :func:`asyncio.set_event_loop` only once
to avoid calling :meth:`~asyncio.AbstractChildWatcher.attach_loop` multiple
times on child watchers. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-18-22-29
.. gh-issue: 95736
.. nonce: LzRZXe
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` to set event loop before
calling setup functions. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-08-01-42-11
.. gh-issue: 95704
.. nonce: MOPFfX
.. section: Library

When a task catches :exc:`asyncio.CancelledError` and raises some other
error, the other error should generally not silently be suppressed.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-15-45-06
.. gh-issue: 95231
.. nonce: i807-g
.. section: Library

Fail gracefully if :data:`~errno.EPERM` or :data:`~errno.ENOSYS` is raised
when loading :mod:`crypt` methods. This may happen when trying to load
``MD5`` on a Linux kernel with :abbr:`FIPS (Federal Information Processing
Standard)` enabled.

..

.. date: 2022-07-09-08-55-04
.. gh-issue: 74116
.. nonce: 0XwYC1
.. section: Library

Allow :meth:`asyncio.StreamWriter.drain` to be awaited concurrently by
multiple tasks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-22-34-42
.. gh-issue: 92986
.. nonce: e6uKxj
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`ast.unparse` when ``ImportFrom.level`` is None

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-17-07-45
.. gh-issue: 96098
.. nonce: nDp43u
.. section: Documentation

Improve discoverability of the higher level concurrent.futures module by
providing clearer links from the lower level threading and multiprocessing
modules.

..

.. date: 2022-08-13-20-34-51
.. gh-issue: 95957
.. nonce: W9ZZAx
.. section: Documentation

What's New 3.11 now has instructions for how to provide compiler and linker
flags for Tcl/Tk and OpenSSL on RHEL 7 and CentOS 7.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-14-59-42
.. gh-issue: 95243
.. nonce: DeD66V
.. section: Tests

Mitigate the inherent race condition from using find_unused_port() in
testSockName() by trying to find an unused port a few times before failing.
Patch by Ross Burton.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-10-28-23
.. gh-issue: 94682
.. nonce: ZtGt_0
.. section: Build

Build and test with OpenSSL 1.1.1q

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-00-11-33
.. gh-issue: 96577
.. nonce: kV4K_1
.. section: Windows

Fixes a potential buffer overrun in :mod:`msilib`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-18-32-47
.. gh-issue: 96559
.. nonce: 561sUd
.. section: Windows

Fixes the Windows launcher not using the compatible interpretation of
default tags found in configuration files when no tag was passed to the
command.
