.. date: 2023-08-22-17-39-12
.. gh-issue: 108310
.. nonce: fVM3sg
.. release date: 2023-08-24
.. section: Security

Fixed an issue where instances of :class:`ssl.SSLSocket` were vulnerable to
a bypass of the TLS handshake and included protections (like certificate
verification) and treating sent unencrypted data as if it were
post-handshake TLS encrypted data.  Security issue reported as
`CVE-2023-40217
<https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2023-40217>`_ by Aapo
Oksman. Patch by Gregory P. Smith.

..

.. date: 2023-07-27-11-47-29
.. gh-issue: 104432
.. nonce: oGHF-z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential unaligned memory access on C APIs involving returned sequences
of ``char *`` pointers within the :mod:`grp` and :mod:`socket` modules.
These were revealed using a ``-fsaniziter=alignment`` build on ARM macOS.
Patch by Christopher Chavez.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-22-35-35
.. gh-issue: 77377
.. nonce: EHAbXx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that multiprocessing synchronization objects created in a fork
context are not sent to a different process created in a spawn context. This
changes a segfault into an actionable RuntimeError in the parent process.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-16-13-51
.. gh-issue: 106092
.. nonce: bObgRM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segmentation fault caused by a use-after-free bug in ``frame_dealloc``
when the trashcan delays the deallocation of a ``PyFrameObject``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-15-59-07
.. gh-issue: 106719
.. nonce: jmVrsv
.. section: Core and Builtins

No longer suppress arbitrary errors in the ``__annotations__`` getter and
setter in the type and module types.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-14-55-45
.. gh-issue: 106723
.. nonce: KsMufQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Propagate ``frozen_modules`` to multiprocessing spawned process
interpreters.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-19-16-24
.. gh-issue: 105979
.. nonce: TDP2CU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in :func:`!_imp.get_frozen_object` due to improper exception
handling.

..

.. date: 2023-06-15-22-11-43
.. gh-issue: 105840
.. nonce: Fum_g_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes when specializing function calls with too many
``__defaults__``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-11-19-51
.. gh-issue: 105588
.. nonce: Y5ovpY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that could result in crashes when compiling malformed
:mod:`ast` nodes.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-10-10-07
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 35VGDd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bugs in the :mod:`builtins` module where exceptions could end up being
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-54-37
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: kqKT3E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug in the compiler where an exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-25-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: ocB7fT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling in :c:func:`PyUnicode_BuildEncodingMap` where an
exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-19-37-29
.. gh-issue: 105235
.. nonce: fgFGTi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent out-of-bounds memory access during ``mmap.find()`` calls.

..

.. date: 2023-01-13-11-37-41
.. gh-issue: 101006
.. nonce: fuLvn2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling when read :mod:`marshal` data.

..

.. date: 2023-08-17-14-45-25
.. gh-issue: 105736
.. nonce: NJsH7r
.. section: Library

Harmonized the pure Python version of OrderedDict with the C version. Now,
both versions set up their internal state in ``__new__``.  Formerly, the
pure Python version did the set up in ``__init__``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-18-20-00
.. gh-issue: 107963
.. nonce: 20g5BG
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`multiprocessing.set_forkserver_preload` to check the given list
of modules names. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-23-11-11
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: 71HMym
.. section: Library

Fixes :func:`os.path.normpath` to handle embedded null characters without
truncating the path.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-17-36-22
.. gh-issue: 107845
.. nonce: dABiMJ
.. section: Library

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now takes the location of symlinks into account
when determining their target, so it will no longer reject some valid
tarballs with ``LinkOutsideDestinationError``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-14-12-07
.. gh-issue: 107715
.. nonce: 238r2f
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`doctest.DocTestFinder.find` in presence of class names with
special characters. Patch by Gertjan van Zwieten.

..

.. date: 2023-08-06-15-29-00
.. gh-issue: 100814
.. nonce: h195gW
.. section: Library

Passing a callable object as an option value to a Tkinter image now raises
the expected TclError instead of an AttributeError.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-05-10-41
.. gh-issue: 106684
.. nonce: P9zRXb
.. section: Library

Close :class:`asyncio.StreamWriter` when it is not closed by application
leading to memory leaks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-12-52-19
.. gh-issue: 107077
.. nonce: -pzHD6
.. section: Library

Seems that in some conditions, OpenSSL will return ``SSL_ERROR_SYSCALL``
instead of ``SSL_ERROR_SSL`` when a certification verification has failed,
but the error parameters will still contain ``ERR_LIB_SSL`` and
``SSL_R_CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED``. We are now detecting this situation and
raising the appropiate ``ssl.SSLCertVerificationError``. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-07-31-07-36-24
.. gh-issue: 107396
.. nonce: 3_Kh6D
.. section: Library

tarfiles; Fixed use before assignment of self.exception for gzip
decompression

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-12-26-23
.. gh-issue: 62519
.. nonce: w8-81X
.. section: Library

Make :func:`gettext.pgettext` search plural definitions when translation is
not found.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-51-33
.. gh-issue: 83006
.. nonce: 21zaCz
.. section: Library

Document behavior of :func:`shutil.disk_usage` for non-mounted filesystems
on Unix.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-13-09-28
.. gh-issue: 106186
.. nonce: EIsUNG
.. section: Library

Do not report ``MultipartInvariantViolationDefect`` defect when the
:class:`email.parser.Parser` class is used to parse emails with
``headersonly=True``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-17-21-45-15
.. gh-issue: 106831
.. nonce: RqVq9X
.. section: Library

Fix potential missing ``NULL`` check of ``d2i_SSL_SESSION`` result in
``_ssl.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-15-10-24-56
.. gh-issue: 106774
.. nonce: FJcqCj
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copy of pip to version 23.2.1.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-16-54-13
.. gh-issue: 106752
.. nonce: BT1Yxw
.. section: Library

Fixed several bug in zipfile.Path in
``name``/``suffix``/``suffixes``/``stem`` operations when no filename is
present and the Path is not at the root of the zipfile.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-04-58-45
.. gh-issue: 106602
.. nonce: dGCcXe
.. section: Library

Add __copy__ and __deepcopy__ in :mod:`enum`

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-09-25-40
.. gh-issue: 106530
.. nonce: VgXrMx
.. section: Library

Revert a change to :func:`colorsys.rgb_to_hls` that caused division by zero
for certain almost-white inputs.  Patch by Terry Jan Reedy.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-14-52-31
.. gh-issue: 106052
.. nonce: ak8nbs
.. section: Library

:mod:`re` module: fix the matching of possessive quantifiers in the case of
a subpattern containing backtracking.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-13-47-28
.. gh-issue: 106510
.. nonce: 9n5BdC
.. section: Library

Improve debug output for atomic groups in regular expressions.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-14-34-10
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: HU5u89
.. section: Library

Fix flag mask inversion when unnamed flags exist.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-13-08-23
.. gh-issue: 90876
.. nonce: Qvlkfl
.. section: Library

Prevent :mod:`multiprocessing.spawn` from failing to *import* in
environments where ``sys.executable`` is ``None``.  This regressed in 3.11
with the addition of support for path-like objects in multiprocessing.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-03-46-20
.. gh-issue: 106350
.. nonce: LLcTEe
.. section: Library

Detect possible memory allocation failure in the libtommath function
:c:func:`mp_init` used by the ``_tkinter`` module.

..

.. date: 2023-07-01-16-40-54
.. gh-issue: 102541
.. nonce: C1ahtk
.. section: Library

Make pydoc.doc catch bad module ImportError when output stream is not None.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-16-42-44
.. gh-issue: 106263
.. nonce: tk-t93
.. section: Library

Fix crash when calling ``repr`` with a manually constructed SignalDict
object. Patch by Charlie Zhao.

..

.. date: 2023-06-11-22-46-06
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: YkhSNt
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :c:func:`!_Unpickler_SetInputStream` where an exception could
end up being overwritten in case of failure.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-46-23
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 9KaioS
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`sys` where exceptions could end up being overwritten
because of deferred error handling.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-00-13
.. gh-issue: 105605
.. nonce: YuwqxY
.. section: Library

Harden :mod:`pyexpat` error handling during module initialisation to prevent
exceptions from possibly being overwritten, and objects from being
dereferenced twice.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-52-45
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 6igkhn
.. section: Library

Fix bug in :mod:`decimal` where an exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-45-26
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 9rp6tG
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_datetime` where exceptions could be overwritten in case
of module initialisation failure.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-16-46
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: EgVJOP
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_ssl` initialisation which could lead to leaked
references and overwritten exceptions.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-46-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: yrJelV
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :class:`array.array` where an exception could end up being
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-40-45
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: _sZilh
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`_ctypes` where exceptions could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-30-59
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: eewafp
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in the :mod:`posix` module where an exception could be
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-25-14
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 95g1eI
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_elementtree` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-11-28
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 4Mxn7t
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`zoneinfo` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-04-39
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: bTcqS9
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`errno` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-17-49-46
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: K6Q8nU
.. section: Library

Fix flag inversion when alias/mask members exist.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-08-58-36
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: bTcqS9
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`pickle` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-14-24-39
.. gh-issue: 103171
.. nonce: b3VJMD
.. section: Library

Revert undocumented behaviour change with runtime-checkable protocols
decorated with :func:`typing.final` in Python 3.11. The behaviour change had
meant that objects would not be considered instances of these protocols at
runtime unless they had a ``__final__`` attribute. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-00-09-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: Y_9D4n
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :mod:`sqlite3` where an exception could be overwritten in the
:meth:`collation <sqlite3.Connection.create_collation>` callback.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-11-50-33
.. gh-issue: 105332
.. nonce: tmpgRA
.. section: Library

Revert pickling method from by-name back to by-value.

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-14-43-56
.. gh-issue: 104554
.. nonce: pwfKIo
.. section: Library

Add RTSPS scheme support in urllib.parse

..

.. date: 2023-03-14-01-19-57
.. gh-issue: 100061
.. nonce: CiXJYn
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that causes wrong matches for regular expressions with possessive
qualifier.

..

.. date: 2023-03-12-01-17-15
.. gh-issue: 102541
.. nonce: LK1adc
.. section: Library

Hide traceback in :func:`help` prompt, when import failed.

..

.. date: 2022-11-26-22-05-22
.. gh-issue: 99203
.. nonce: j0DUae
.. section: Library

Restore following CPython <= 3.10.5 behavior of :func:`shutil.make_archive`:
do not create an empty archive if ``root_dir`` is not a directory, and, in
that case, raise :class:`FileNotFoundError` or :class:`NotADirectoryError`
regardless of ``format`` choice. Beyond the brought-back behavior, the
function may now also raise these exceptions in ``dry_run`` mode.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-18-45-13
.. gh-issue: 94777
.. nonce: mOybx7
.. section: Library

Fix hanging :mod:`multiprocessing` ``ProcessPoolExecutor`` when a child
process crashes while data is being written in the call queue.

..

.. bpo: 18319
.. date: 2020-05-03-00-33-15
.. nonce: faPTlx
.. section: Library

Ensure ``gettext(msg)`` retrieve translations even if a plural form exists.
In other words: ``gettext(msg) == ngettext(msg, '', 1)``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-14-13
.. gh-issue: 107008
.. nonce: 3JQ1Vt
.. section: Documentation

Document the :mod:`curses` module variables :const:`~curses.LINES` and
:const:`~curses.COLS`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-11-51-57
.. gh-issue: 106948
.. nonce: K_JQ7j
.. section: Documentation

Add a number of standard external names to ``nitpick_ignore``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-16-22-08-24
.. gh-issue: 54738
.. nonce: mJvCnj
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation on how to localize the :mod:`argparse` module.

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-04-08-18
.. gh-issue: 105776
.. nonce: oE6wp_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_cppext when the C compiler command ``-std=c11`` option: remove
``-std=`` options from the compiler command. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-14-36-33
.. gh-issue: 107237
.. nonce: y1pY79
.. section: Tests

``test_logging``: Fix ``test_udp_reconnection()`` by increasing the timeout
from 100 ms to 5 minutes (LONG_TIMEOUT). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-02-51-08
.. gh-issue: 101634
.. nonce: Rayczr
.. section: Tests

When running the Python test suite with ``-jN`` option, if a worker stdout
cannot be decoded from the locale encoding report a failed testn so the
exitcode is non-zero. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-17-05-33
.. gh-issue: 107814
.. nonce: c0Oapq
.. section: Build

When calling ``find_python.bat`` with ``-q`` it did not properly silence the
output of nuget. That is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-07-28-18-17-33
.. gh-issue: 106881
.. nonce: U3Ezdq
.. section: Build

Check for ``linux/limits.h`` before including it in
``Modules/posixmodule.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-20-23-49-30
.. gh-issue: 104692
.. nonce: s5UIu5
.. section: Build

Include ``commoninstall`` as a prerequisite for ``bininstall``

This ensures that ``commoninstall`` is completed before ``bininstall`` is
started when parallel builds are used (``make -j install``), and so the
``python3`` symlink is only installed after all standard library modules are
installed.

..

.. date: 2023-01-17-21-32-51
.. gh-issue: 100340
.. nonce: i9zRGM
.. section: Build

Allows -Wno-int-conversion for wasm-sdk 17 and onwards, thus enables
building WASI builds once against the latest sdk.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-00-36-57
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: q24ITw
.. section: Windows

Fixes :func:`~os.path.realpath` to behave consistently when passed a path
containing an embedded null character on Windows. In strict mode, it now
raises :exc:`OSError` instead of the unexpected :exc:`ValueError`, and in
non-strict mode will make the path absolute.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-13-01-26
.. gh-issue: 106844
.. nonce: mci4xO
.. section: Windows

Fix integer overflow in :func:`!_winapi.LCMapStringEx` which affects
:func:`ntpath.normcase`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-20-48-17
.. gh-issue: 99079
.. nonce: CIMftz
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.9

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-11-30-17
.. gh-issue: 105436
.. nonce: 1qlDxw
.. section: Windows

Ensure that an empty environment block is terminated by two null characters,
as is required by Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-08-12-13-33-57
.. gh-issue: 107565
.. nonce: SJwqf4
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.10.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-23-42-20
.. gh-issue: 99079
.. nonce: JAtoh1
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.9.

..

.. date: 2023-08-12-13-18-15
.. gh-issue: 107565
.. nonce: Tv22Ne
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update multissltests and GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 1.1.1v, 3.0.10,
and 3.1.2.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-16-30-48
.. gh-issue: 95065
.. nonce: -im4R5
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports overriding automatically generated signature by
using directive ``@text_signature``. See
`the Argument Clinic docs <devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/>`__.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-23-16-05
.. gh-issue: 106970
.. nonce: NLRnml
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix bugs in the Argument Clinic ``destination <name> clear`` command; the
destination buffers would never be cleared, and the ``destination``
directive parser would simply continue to the fault handler after processing
the command. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-10-59-03
.. gh-issue: 107916
.. nonce: KH4Muo
.. section: C API

C API functions :c:func:`PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename`,
:c:func:`PyErr_SetExcFromWindowsErrWithFilename` and
:c:func:`PyErr_SetFromWindowsErrWithFilename` save now the error code before
calling :c:func:`PyUnicode_DecodeFSDefault`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-12-33-00
.. gh-issue: 107915
.. nonce: jQ0wOi
.. section: C API

Such C API functions as ``PyErr_SetString()``, ``PyErr_Format()``,
``PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename()`` and many others no longer crash or
ignore errors if it failed to format the error message or decode the
filename. Instead, they keep a corresponding error.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-13-41-09
.. gh-issue: 107226
.. nonce: N919zH
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyModule_AddObjectRef` is now only available in the limited API
version 3.10 or later.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-34-25
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: n7amiF
.. section: C API

Fix a bug in :c:func:`PyErr_WarnExplicit` where an exception could end up
being overwritten if the API failed internally.

..

.. date: 2022-11-20-09-52-50
.. gh-issue: 99612
.. nonce: eBHksg
.. section: C API

Fix :c:func:`PyUnicode_DecodeUTF8Stateful` for ASCII-only data:
``*consumed`` was not set.
