.. date: 2022-05-25-12-30-12
.. gh-issue: 84694
.. nonce: 5sjy2w
.. release date: 2022-05-30
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ``--experimental-isolated-subinterpreters`` configure option and
``EXPERIMENTAL_ISOLATED_SUBINTERPRETERS`` macro have been removed.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-04-07-22
.. gh-issue: 91924
.. nonce: -UyO4q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``__lltrace__`` debug feature if the stdout encoding is not UTF-8. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-22-02-37-50
.. gh-issue: 93061
.. nonce: r70Imp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Backward jumps after ``async for`` loops are no longer given dubious line
numbers.

..

.. date: 2022-05-21-23-21-37
.. gh-issue: 93065
.. nonce: 5I18WC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix contextvars HAMT implementation to handle iteration over deep trees.

The bug was discovered and fixed by Eli Libman. See
`MagicStack/immutables#84
<https://github.com/MagicStack/immutables/issues/84>`_ for more details.

..

.. date: 2022-05-15-15-25-05
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: MoPHYW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Decrease default recursion limit on WASI to address limited call stack size.

..

.. date: 2022-05-14-13-22-11
.. gh-issue: 92804
.. nonce: rAqpI2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in ``memoryview`` iterator as it was not finalized at exit.
Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-13-23-19
.. gh-issue: 92236
.. nonce: sDRzUe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove spurious "LINE" event when starting a generator or coroutine, visible
tracing functions implemented in C.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-11-34-35
.. gh-issue: 92619
.. nonce: u0V0lY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the compiler duplicate an exit block only if none of its instructions
have a lineno (previously only the first instruction in the block was
checked, leading to unnecessarily duplicated blocks).

..

.. date: 2022-05-03-20-12-18
.. gh-issue: 92261
.. nonce: aigLnb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix hang when trying to iterate over a ``typing.Union``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-27-13-18-18
.. gh-issue: 93297
.. nonce: e2zuHz
.. section: Library

Make asyncio task groups prevent child tasks from being GCed

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-02-45-41
.. gh-issue: 90817
.. nonce: yxANgU
.. section: Library

The :func:`locale.resetlocale` function is deprecated and will be removed in
Python 3.13. Use ``locale.setlocale(locale.LC_ALL, "")`` instead. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-24-10-59-02
.. gh-issue: 92728
.. nonce: zxTifq
.. section: Library

The :func:`re.template` function and the corresponding :const:`re.TEMPLATE`
and :const:`re.T` flags are restored after they were removed in 3.11.0b1,
but they are now deprecated, so they might be removed from Python 3.13.

..

.. date: 2022-05-21-13-16-16
.. gh-issue: 93044
.. nonce: eJ_XkZ
.. section: Library

No longer convert the database argument of :func:`sqlite3.connect` to bytes
before passing it to the factory.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-15-52-43
.. gh-issue: 93010
.. nonce: WF-cAc
.. section: Library

In a very special case, the email package tried to append the nonexistent
``InvalidHeaderError`` to the defect list. It should have been
``InvalidHeaderDefect``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-13-33-18
.. gh-issue: 92675
.. nonce: ZeerMZ
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`venv.ensure_directories` to accept :class:`pathlib.Path`
arguments in addition to :class:`str` paths. Patch by David Foster.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-21-04-09
.. gh-issue: 87901
.. nonce: lnf041
.. section: Library

Removed the ``encoding`` argument from :func:`os.popen` that was added in
3.11b1.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-17-18-41
.. gh-issue: 91922
.. nonce: DwWIsJ
.. section: Library

Fix function :func:`sqlite.connect` and the :class:`sqlite.Connection`
constructor on non-UTF-8 locales. Also, they now support bytes paths
non-decodable with the current FS encoding.

..

.. date: 2022-05-16-14-35-39
.. gh-issue: 92839
.. nonce: owSMyo
.. section: Library

Fixed crash resulting from calling bisect.insort() or bisect.insort_left()
with the key argument not equal to None.

..

.. date: 2022-05-14-11-41-23
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: kPdOZl
.. section: Library

:mod:`subprocess` now fails early on Emscripten and WASI platforms to work
around missing :func:`os.pipe` on WASI.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-19-33-27
.. gh-issue: 92671
.. nonce: KE4v6a
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`ast.unparse` for empty tuples in the assignment target context.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-14-34-09
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: glkou2
.. section: Library

:meth:`~datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp` no longer attempts to resolve
``fold`` in the pure Python implementation, since the fold is never 1 in
UTC. In addition to being slightly faster in the common case, this also
prevents some errors when the timestamp is close to :attr:`datetime.min
<datetime.datetime.min>`.  Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-07-57-27
.. gh-issue: 92550
.. nonce: Rk_UzM
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`pathlib.Path.rglob` for empty pattern.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-09-28-02
.. gh-issue: 92530
.. nonce: M4Q1RS
.. section: Library

Fix an issue that occurred after interrupting
:func:`threading.Condition.notify`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-01-27-25
.. gh-issue: 92531
.. nonce: vV7S_O
.. section: Library

The statistics.median_grouped() function now always return a float.
Formerly, it did not convert the input type when for sequences of length
one.

..

.. date: 2022-04-25-10-23-01
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: DOHa6B
.. section: Library

:class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree` method
:meth:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree.write` and function
:func:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.tostring` now use the text file's encoding
("UTF-8" if not available) instead of locale encoding in XML declaration
when ``encoding="unicode"`` is specified.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-22-07-36
.. gh-issue: 90622
.. nonce: 0C6l8h
.. section: Library

Worker processes for :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` are no
longer spawned on demand (a feature added in 3.9) when the multiprocessing
context start method is ``"fork"`` as that can lead to deadlocks in the
child processes due to a fork happening while threads are running.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-13-16-25
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: 9OGsrN
.. section: Library

Remove an unhandled error case in the C implementation of calls to
:meth:`datetime.fromtimestamp <datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp>` with no
time zone (i.e. getting a local time from an epoch timestamp). This should
have no user-facing effect other than giving a possibly more accurate error
message when called with timestamps that fall on 10000-01-01 in the local
time. Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. bpo: 39064
.. date: 2022-04-03-19-40-09
.. nonce: 76PbIz
.. section: Library

:class:`zipfile.ZipFile` now raises :exc:`zipfile.BadZipFile` instead of
``ValueError`` when reading a corrupt zip file in which the central
directory offset is negative.

..

.. bpo: 45393
.. date: 2022-02-09-23-44-27
.. nonce: 9v5Y8U
.. section: Library

Fix the formatting for ``await x`` and ``not x`` in the operator precedence
table when using the :func:`help` system.

..

.. bpo: 28249
.. date: 2022-01-09-14-23-00
.. nonce: 4dzB80
.. section: Library

Set :attr:`doctest.DocTest.lineno` to ``None`` when object does not have
:attr:`__doc__`.

..

.. bpo: 45046
.. date: 2021-08-29-19-59-16
.. nonce: eGq0NC
.. section: Library

Add support of context managers in :mod:`unittest`: methods
:meth:`~unittest.TestCase.enterContext` and
:meth:`~unittest.TestCase.enterClassContext` of class
:class:`~unittest.TestCase`, method
:meth:`~unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase.enterAsyncContext` of class
:class:`~unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` and function
:func:`unittest.enterModuleContext`.

..

.. bpo: 42627
.. date: 2021-05-22-07-58-59
.. nonce: EejtD0
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect parsing of Windows registry proxy settings

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-11-33-23
.. gh-issue: 86438
.. nonce: kEGGmK
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that :option:`-W` and :envvar:`PYTHONWARNINGS` are matched literally
and case-insensitively, rather than as regular expressions, in
:mod:`warnings`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-23-58-26
.. gh-issue: 92240
.. nonce: bHvYiz
.. section: Documentation

Added release dates for "What's New in Python 3.X" for 3.0, 3.1, 3.2, 3.8
and 3.10

..

.. bpo: 40838
.. date: 2022-01-13-16-03-15
.. nonce: k3NVCf
.. section: Documentation

Document that :func:`inspect.getdoc`, :func:`inspect.getmodule`, and
:func:`inspect.getsourcefile` might return ``None``.

..

.. bpo: 38056
.. date: 2019-09-12-08-28-17
.. nonce: 6ktYkc
.. section: Documentation

Overhaul the :ref:`error-handlers` documentation in :mod:`codecs`.

..

.. bpo: 13553
.. date: 2017-12-10-19-13-39
.. nonce: gQbZs4
.. section: Documentation

Document tkinter.Tk args.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-05-51-06
.. gh-issue: 92670
.. nonce: 7L43Z_
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_shutil.TestCopy.test_copyfile_nonexistent_dir`` test on AIX as
the test uses a trailing slash to force the OS consider the path as a
directory, but on AIX the trailing slash has no effect and is considered as
a file.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-10-19-15
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: -syvqK
.. section: Build

Disable pymalloc and increase stack size on ``wasm32-wasi``.

..

.. bpo: 34449
.. date: 2018-08-21-11-10-18
.. nonce: Z3qm3c
.. section: Build

Drop invalid compiler switch ``-fPIC`` for HP aCC on HP-UX. Patch by Michael
Osipov.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-21-44-25
.. gh-issue: 92817
.. nonce: Jrf-Kv
.. section: Windows

Ensures that :file:`py.exe` will prefer an active virtual environment over
default tags specified with environment variables or through a
:file:`py.ini` file.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-14-01-30
.. gh-issue: 92984
.. nonce: Dsxnlr
.. section: Windows

Explicitly disable incremental linking for non-Debug builds

..

.. date: 2022-05-16-11-45-06
.. gh-issue: 92841
.. nonce: NQx107
.. section: Windows

:mod:`asyncio` no longer throws ``RuntimeError: Event loop is closed`` on
interpreter exit after asynchronous socket activity. Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. bpo: 46907
.. date: 2022-05-05-06-27-59
.. nonce: IW-uvT
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.38.4.

..

.. date: 2022-05-23-15-22-18
.. gh-issue: 92898
.. nonce: Qjc9d3
.. section: C API

Fix C++ compiler warnings when casting function arguments to ``PyObject*``.
Patch by Serge Guelton.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-18-05-51
.. gh-issue: 92913
.. nonce: Ass1Hv
.. section: C API

Ensures changes to :c:member:`PyConfig.module_search_paths` are ignored
unless :c:member:`PyConfig.module_search_paths_set` is set

..

.. date: 2022-05-13-18-17-48
.. gh-issue: 92781
.. nonce: TVDr3-
.. section: C API

Avoid mixing declarations and code in the C API to fix the compiler warning:
"ISO C90 forbids mixed declarations and code"
[-Werror=declaration-after-statement]. Patch by Victor Stinner.
