.. date: 2022-07-31-13-23-12
.. gh-issue: 95150
.. nonce: 67FXVo
.. release date: 2022-08-05
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update code object hashing and equality to consider all debugging and
exception handling tables. This fixes an issue where certain non-identical
code objects could be "deduplicated" during compilation.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-08-33-31
.. gh-issue: 95355
.. nonce: yN4XVk
.. section: Core and Builtins

``_PyPegen_Parser_New`` now properly detects token memory allocation errors.
Patch by Honglin Zhu.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-14-21-57
.. gh-issue: 90081
.. nonce: HVAS5x
.. section: Core and Builtins

Run Python code in tracer/profiler function at full speed. Fixes slowdown in
earlier versions of 3.11.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-14-05-07
.. gh-issue: 95324
.. nonce: 28Q5u7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit a warning in debug mode if an object does not call
:c:func:`PyObject_GC_UnTrack` before deallocation. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-00-27-47
.. gh-issue: 95185
.. nonce: ghYTZx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevented crashes in the AST constructor when compiling some absurdly long
expressions like ``"+0"*1000000``. :exc:`RecursionError` is now raised
instead. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-19-16-25
.. gh-issue: 93351
.. nonce: 0Jyvu-
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`ast.AST` node positions are now validated when provided to
:func:`compile` and other related functions. If invalid positions are
detected, a :exc:`ValueError` will be raised.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-09-41-55
.. gh-issue: 94938
.. nonce: xYBlM7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error detection in some builtin functions when keyword argument name is
an instance of a str subclass with overloaded ``__eq__`` and ``__hash__``.
Previously it could cause SystemError or other undesired behavior.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-21-01-17
.. gh-issue: 95609
.. nonce: xxyjyX
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 22.2.2.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-16-52-32
.. gh-issue: 95289
.. nonce: FMnHlV
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.TaskGroup` to propagate exception when
:exc:`asyncio.CancelledError` was replaced with another exception by a
context manger. Patch by Kumar Aditya and Guido van Rossum.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-19-43-07
.. gh-issue: 95339
.. nonce: NuVQ68
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 22.2.1.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-11-35-45
.. gh-issue: 95045
.. nonce: iysT-Q
.. section: Library

Fix GC crash when deallocating ``_lsprof.Profiler`` by untracking it before
calling any callbacks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-18-00-42
.. gh-issue: 95097
.. nonce: lu5qNf
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`asyncio.run` for :class:`asyncio.Task` implementations without
:meth:`~asyncio.Task.uncancel` method. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-50-05
.. gh-issue: 93899
.. nonce: VT34A5
.. section: Library

Fix check for existence of :data:`os.EFD_CLOEXEC`, :data:`os.EFD_NONBLOCK`
and :data:`os.EFD_SEMAPHORE` flags on older kernel versions where these
flags are not present. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-42-05
.. gh-issue: 95166
.. nonce: xw6p3C
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`concurrent.futures.Executor.map` to cancel the currently waiting
on future on an error - e.g. TimeoutError or KeyboardInterrupt.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-22-59-22
.. gh-issue: 95109
.. nonce: usxA9r
.. section: Library

Ensure that timeouts scheduled with :class:`asyncio.Timeout` that have
already expired are delivered promptly.

..

.. date: 2022-06-02-08-40-58
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: Gtk44w
.. section: Library

Suppress writing an XML declaration in open files in ``ElementTree.write()``
with ``encoding='unicode'`` and ``xml_declaration=None``.

..

.. date: 2022-04-12-18-05-40
.. gh-issue: 91447
.. nonce: N_Fs4H
.. section: Library

Fix findtext in the xml module to only give an empty string when the text
attribute is set to None.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-13-35-08
.. gh-issue: 91207
.. nonce: eJ4pPf
.. section: Documentation

Fix stylesheet not working in Windows CHM htmlhelp docs and add warning that
they are deprecated. Contributed by C.A.M. Gerlach.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-23-02-19
.. gh-issue: 95451
.. nonce: -tgB93
.. section: Documentation

Update library documentation with :ref:`availability information
<wasm-availability>` on WebAssembly platforms ``wasm32-emscripten`` and
``wasm32-wasi``.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-09-04-02
.. gh-issue: 95415
.. nonce: LKTyw6
.. section: Documentation

Use consistent syntax for platform availability. The directive now supports
a content body and emits a warning when it encounters an unknown platform.

..

.. date: 2022-06-19-18-18-22
.. gh-issue: 86128
.. nonce: 39DDTD
.. section: Documentation

Document a limitation in ThreadPoolExecutor where its exit handler is
executed before any handlers in atexit.

..

.. date: 2022-08-05-09-57-43
.. gh-issue: 95573
.. nonce: edMdQB
.. section: Tests

:source:`Lib/test/test_asyncio/test_ssl.py` exposed a bug in the macOS
kernel where intense concurrent load on non-blocking sockets occasionally
causes :const:`errno.ENOBUFS` ("No buffer space available") to be emitted.
FB11063974 filed with Apple, in the mean time as a workaround buffer size
used in tests on macOS is decreased to avoid intermittent failures.  Patch
by Fantix King.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-15-22-19
.. gh-issue: 95280
.. nonce: h8HvbP
.. section: Tests

Fix problem with ``test_ssl`` ``test_get_ciphers`` on systems that require
perfect forward secrecy (PFS) ciphers.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-12-22-00
.. gh-issue: 94675
.. nonce: IiTs5f
.. section: Tests

Add a regression test for :mod:`re` exponentional slowdown when using
rjsmin.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-18-13-34
.. gh-issue: 94801
.. nonce: 9fREfy
.. section: Build

Fix a regression in ``configure`` script that caused some header checks to
ignore custom ``CPPFLAGS``. The regression was introduced in :gh:`94802`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-09-48-43
.. gh-issue: 95145
.. nonce: ZNS3dj
.. section: Build

wasm32-wasi builds no longer depend on WASIX's pthread stubs. Python now has
its own stubbed pthread API.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-08-59-35
.. gh-issue: 95174
.. nonce: g8woUW
.. section: Build

Python now detects missing ``dup`` function in WASI and works around some
missing :mod:`errno`, :mod:`select`, and :mod:`socket` constants.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-21-39-09
.. gh-issue: 95174
.. nonce: 7cYMZR
.. section: Build

Python now skips missing :mod:`socket` functions and methods on WASI. WASI
can only create sockets from existing fd / accept and has no netdb.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-09-17-01
.. gh-issue: 95085
.. nonce: E9x2S_
.. section: Build

Platforms ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten`` and ``wasm32-unknown-wasi`` have
been promoted to :pep:`11` tier 3 platform support.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-18-47-54
.. gh-issue: 95656
.. nonce: VJ1d13
.. section: Windows

Enable the :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.enable_load_extension` :mod:`sqlite3`
API.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-01-12-27
.. gh-issue: 95587
.. nonce: Fvdv5q
.. section: Windows

Fixes some issues where the Windows installer would incorrectly detect
certain features of an existing install when upgrading.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-00-49-46
.. gh-issue: 94399
.. nonce: KvxHc0
.. section: Windows

Restores the behaviour of :ref:`launcher` for ``/usr/bin/env`` shebang
lines, which will now search :envvar:`PATH` for an executable matching the
given command. If none is found, the usual search process is used.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-14-18-33
.. gh-issue: 95445
.. nonce: mjrTaq
.. section: Windows

Fixes the unsuccessful removal of the HTML document directory when
uninstalling with Windows msi.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-20-21-38
.. gh-issue: 95359
.. nonce: ywMrgu
.. section: Windows

Fix :ref:`launcher` handling of :file:`py.ini` commands (it was incorrectly
expecting a ``py_`` prefix on keys) and crashes when reading per-user
configuration file.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-20-33-12
.. gh-issue: 95285
.. nonce: w6fa22
.. section: Windows

Fix :ref:`launcher` handling of command lines where it is only passed a
short executable name.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-20-07-51
.. gh-issue: 65802
.. nonce: xnThWe
.. section: IDLE

Document handling of extensions in Save As dialogs.

..

.. date: 2022-08-01-23-31-48
.. gh-issue: 95191
.. nonce: U7vryB
.. section: IDLE

Include prompts when saving Shell (interactive input and output).

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-22-15-14
.. gh-issue: 95511
.. nonce: WX6PmB
.. section: IDLE

Fix the Shell context menu copy-with-prompts bug of copying an extra line
when one selects whole lines.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-15-10-39
.. gh-issue: 95471
.. nonce: z3scVG
.. section: IDLE

In the Edit menu, move ``Select All`` and add a new separator.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-11-08-52
.. gh-issue: 95411
.. nonce: dazlqH
.. section: IDLE

Enable using IDLE's module browser with .pyw files.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-18-56-57
.. gh-issue: 89610
.. nonce: hcosiM
.. section: IDLE

Add .pyi as a recognized extension for IDLE on macOS.    This allows opening
stub files by double clicking on them in the Finder.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-14-39-08
.. gh-issue: 92678
.. nonce: ozFTEx
.. section: C API

Restore the 3.10 behavior for multiple inheritance of C extension classes
that store their dictionary at the end of the struct.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-22-37-40
.. gh-issue: 94936
.. nonce: LGlmKv
.. section: C API

Added :c:func:`PyCode_GetVarnames`, :c:func:`PyCode_GetCellvars` and
:c:func:`PyCode_GetFreevars` for accessing ``co_varnames``, ``co_cellvars``
and ``co_freevars`` respectively via the C API.
