.. date: 2022-09-28-17-09-37
.. gh-issue: 97616
.. nonce: K1e3Xs
.. release date: 2022-10-24
.. section: Security

Fix multiplying a list by an integer (``list *= int``): detect the integer
overflow when the new allocated length is close to the maximum size. Issue
reported by Jordan Limor.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-10-42-00
.. gh-issue: 97514
.. nonce: Yggdsl
.. section: Security

On Linux the :mod:`multiprocessing` module returns to using filesystem
backed unix domain sockets for communication with the *forkserver* process
instead of the Linux abstract socket namespace.  Only code that chooses to
use the :ref:`"forkserver" start method <multiprocessing-start-methods>` is
affected.

Abstract sockets have no permissions and could allow any user on the system
in the same `network namespace
<https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html>`_ (often
the whole system) to inject code into the multiprocessing *forkserver*
process. This was a potential privilege escalation. Filesystem based socket
permissions restrict this to the *forkserver* process user as was the
default in Python 3.8 and earlier.

This prevents Linux `CVE-2022-42919
<https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2022-42919>`_.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-02-11-34
.. gh-issue: 97002
.. nonce: Zvsk71
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where several frame objects could be backed by the same
interpreter frame, possibly leading to corrupted memory and hard crashes of
the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-13-35-48
.. gh-issue: 97752
.. nonce: 0xTjJY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible data corruption or crashes when accessing the ``f_back`` member
of newly-created generator or coroutine frames.

..

.. date: 2022-09-21-16-06-37
.. gh-issue: 96975
.. nonce: BmE0XY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash occurring when :c:func:`PyEval_GetFrame` is called while the
topmost Python frame is in a partially-initialized state.

..

.. date: 2022-09-21-14-38-31
.. gh-issue: 96848
.. nonce: WuoLzU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix command line parsing: reject :option:`-X int_max_str_digits <-X>` option
with no value (invalid) when the :envvar:`PYTHONINTMAXSTRDIGITS` environment
variable is set to a valid limit. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-18-08-47-40
.. gh-issue: 96821
.. nonce: Co2iOq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behaviour in ``_testcapimodule.c``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-19-02-40
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: cJmnst
.. section: Core and Builtins

When :exc:`ValueError` is raised if an integer is larger than the limit,
mention the :func:`sys.set_int_max_str_digits` function in the error
message. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-19-20-44
.. gh-issue: 96587
.. nonce: bVxhX2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly raise ``SyntaxError`` on exception groups (:pep:`654`) on python
versions prior to 3.11

..

.. bpo: 42316
.. date: 2020-11-15-02-08-43
.. nonce: LqdkWK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Document some places where an assignment expression needs parentheses.

..

.. date: 2022-10-16-15-31-50
.. gh-issue: 98331
.. nonce: Y5kPOX
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copies of pip and setuptools to versions 22.3 and 65.5.0
respectively.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-23-42-00
.. gh-issue: 90985
.. nonce: s280JY
.. section: Library

Earlier in 3.11 we deprecated ``asyncio.Task.cancel("message")``. We
realized we were too harsh, and have undeprecated it.

..

.. date: 2022-09-25-23-24-52
.. gh-issue: 97545
.. nonce: HZLSNt
.. section: Library

Make Semaphore run faster.

..

.. date: 2022-09-24-18-56-23
.. gh-issue: 96865
.. nonce: o9WUkW
.. section: Library

fix Flag to use boundary CONFORM

This restores previous Flag behavior of allowing flags with non-sequential
values to be combined; e.g.

class Skip(Flag):         TWO = 2         EIGHT = 8

Skip.TWO | Skip.EIGHT -> <Skip.TWO|EIGHT: 10>

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-15-57-39
.. gh-issue: 90155
.. nonce: YMstB5
.. section: Library

Fix broken :class:`asyncio.Semaphore` when acquire is cancelled.

..

.. date: 2022-10-02-10-58-52
.. gh-issue: 97741
.. nonce: 39l023
.. section: Documentation

Fix ``!`` in c domain ref target syntax via a ``conf.py`` patch, so it works
as intended to disable ref target resolution.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-18-42-10
.. gh-issue: 93031
.. nonce: c2RdJe
.. section: Documentation

Update tutorial introduction output to use 3.10+ SyntaxError invalid range.

..

.. date: 2022-10-20-17-49-50
.. gh-issue: 95027
.. nonce: viRpJB
.. section: Tests

On Windows, when the Python test suite is run with the ``-jN`` option, the
ANSI code page is now used as the encoding for the stdout temporary file,
rather than using UTF-8 which can lead to decoding errors. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-11-14-23-49
.. gh-issue: 96729
.. nonce: W4uBWL
.. section: Build

Ensure that Windows releases built with ``Tools\msi\buildrelease.bat`` are
upgradable to and from official Python releases.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-20-00-28
.. gh-issue: 98360
.. nonce: O2m6YG
.. section: Windows

Fixes :mod:`multiprocessing` spawning child processes on Windows from a
virtual environment to ensure that child processes that also use
:mod:`multiprocessing` to spawn more children will recognize that they are
in a virtual environment.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-19-35-37
.. gh-issue: 98414
.. nonce: FbHZuS
.. section: Windows

Fix :file:`py.exe` launcher handling of ``-V:<company>/`` option when
default preferences have been set in environment variables or configuration
files.

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-23-08-49
.. gh-issue: 90989
.. nonce: no89Q2
.. section: Windows

Clarify some text in the Windows installer.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-15-26-58
.. gh-issue: 97897
.. nonce: Rf-C6u
.. section: macOS

The macOS 13 SDK includes support for the ``mkfifoat`` and ``mknodat``
system calls. Using the ``dir_fd`` option with either :func:`os.mkfifo` or
:func:`os.mknod` could result in a segfault if cpython is built with the
macOS 13 SDK but run on an earlier version of macOS. Prevent this by adding
runtime support for detection of these system calls ("weaklinking") as is
done for other newer syscalls on macOS.
