.. date: 2023-06-01-03-24-58
.. gh-issue: 103142
.. nonce: GLWDMX
.. release date: 2023-06-06
.. section: Security

The version of OpenSSL used in our binary builds has been upgraded to 1.1.1u
to address several CVEs.

..

.. date: 2023-05-02-17-56-32
.. gh-issue: 99889
.. nonce: l664SU
.. section: Security

Fixed a security in flaw in :func:`uu.decode` that could allow for directory
traversal based on the input if no ``out_file`` was specified.

..

.. date: 2023-05-01-15-03-25
.. gh-issue: 104049
.. nonce: b01Y3g
.. section: Security

Do not expose the local on-disk location in directory indexes produced by
:class:`http.client.SimpleHTTPRequestHandler`.

..

.. date: 2023-03-07-20-59-17
.. gh-issue: 102153
.. nonce: 14CLSZ
.. section: Security

:func:`urllib.parse.urlsplit` now strips leading C0 control and space
characters following the specification for URLs defined by WHATWG in
response to CVE-2023-24329. Patch by Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-19-35-22
.. gh-issue: 105164
.. nonce: 6Wajph
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure annotations are set up correctly if the only annotation in a block is
within a :keyword:`match` block. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-18-13-00-21
.. gh-issue: 104615
.. nonce: h_rtw2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix wrong ordering of assignments in code like ``a, a = x, y``. Contributed
by Carl Meyer.

..

.. date: 2023-05-14-18-56-54
.. gh-issue: 104482
.. nonce: yaQsv8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix three error handling bugs in ast.c's validation of pattern matching
statements.

..

.. date: 2023-05-13-06-22-52
.. gh-issue: 102818
.. nonce: HIX1Dr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not add a frame to the traceback in the ``sys.setprofile`` and
``sys.settrace`` trampoline functions. This ensures that frames are not
duplicated if an exception is raised in the callback function, and ensures
that frames are not omitted if a C callback is used and that does not add
the frame.

..

.. date: 2023-05-12-00-19-02
.. gh-issue: 104405
.. nonce: tXV5fn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where some :term:`bytecode` instructions could ignore
:pep:`523` when "inlining" calls.

..

.. date: 2023-05-01-12-03-52
.. gh-issue: 104018
.. nonce: PFxGS4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow the "z" format specifier in %-format of bytes objects.

..

.. date: 2023-04-28-18-57-13
.. gh-issue: 103971
.. nonce: Q3U9lv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where incorrect locations numbers could be assigned to code
following ``case`` blocks.

..

.. date: 2023-04-21-17-03-14
.. gh-issue: 102310
.. nonce: anLjDx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the error range for invalid bytes literals.

..

.. date: 2023-04-21-16-12-41
.. gh-issue: 103590
.. nonce: 7DHDOE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not wrap a single exception raised from a ``try-except*`` construct in an
:exc:`ExceptionGroup`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-14-22-35-23
.. gh-issue: 101517
.. nonce: 5EqM-S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug in line numbers of instructions emitted for :keyword:`except*
<except_star>`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-08-17-13-07
.. gh-issue: 103242
.. nonce: ysI1b3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Migrate :meth:`~ssl.SSLContext.set_ecdh_curve` method not to use deprecated
OpenSSL APIs. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-04-01-00-46-31
.. gh-issue: 102700
.. nonce: 493NB4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow built-in modules to be submodules. This allows submodules to be
statically linked into a CPython binary.

..

.. date: 2023-02-12-22-40-22
.. gh-issue: 101857
.. nonce: _bribG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix xattr support detection on Linux systems by widening the check to linux,
not just glibc. This fixes support for musl.

..

.. date: 2022-11-08-12-36-25
.. gh-issue: 99184
.. nonce: KIaqzz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Bypass instance attribute access of ``__name__`` in ``repr`` of
:class:`weakref.ref`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-27-11-59-13
.. gh-issue: 96670
.. nonce: XrBBit
.. section: Core and Builtins

The parser now raises :exc:`SyntaxError` when parsing source code containing
null bytes. Backported from ``aab01e3``. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. bpo: 31821
.. date: 2019-12-01-12-58-31
.. nonce: 1FNmwk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`!pause_reading` to work when called from :func:`!connection_made`
in :mod:`asyncio`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-02-38-26
.. gh-issue: 105080
.. nonce: 2imGMg
.. section: Library

Fixed inconsistent signature on derived classes for
:func:`inspect.signature`

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-09-34-23
.. gh-issue: 104874
.. nonce: oqyJSy
.. section: Library

Document the ``__name__`` and ``__supertype__`` attributes of
:class:`typing.NewType`. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-17-20-03-01
.. gh-issue: 104340
.. nonce: kp_XmX
.. section: Library

When an ``asyncio`` pipe protocol loses its connection due to an error, and
the caller doesn't await ``wait_closed()`` on the corresponding
``StreamWriter``, don't log a warning about an exception that was never
retrieved. After all, according to the ``StreamWriter.close()`` docs, the
``wait_closed()`` call is optional ("not mandatory").

..

.. date: 2023-05-17-08-01-36
.. gh-issue: 104372
.. nonce: jpoWs6
.. section: Library

Refactored the ``_posixsubprocess`` internals to avoid Python C API usage
between fork and exec when marking ``pass_fds=`` file descriptors
inheritable.

..

.. date: 2023-05-16-11-02-44
.. gh-issue: 75367
.. nonce: qLWR35
.. section: Library

Fix data descriptor detection in  :func:`inspect.getattr_static`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-16-10-07-16
.. gh-issue: 104536
.. nonce: hFWD8f
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in the internal :mod:`multiprocessing.process` cleanup
logic that could manifest as an unintended ``AttributeError`` when calling
``process.close()``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-11-23-03-00
.. gh-issue: 104399
.. nonce: MMatTP
.. section: Library

Prepare the ``_tkinter`` module for building with Tcl 9.0 and future
libtommath by replacing usage of deprecated functions
:c:func:`mp_to_unsigned_bin_n` and :c:func:`mp_unsigned_bin_size` when
necessary.

..

.. date: 2023-05-08-20-57-17
.. gh-issue: 104307
.. nonce: DSB93G
.. section: Library

:func:`socket.getnameinfo` now releases the GIL while contacting the DNS
server

..

.. date: 2023-05-08-15-39-00
.. gh-issue: 87695
.. nonce: f6iO7v
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :meth:`pathlib.Path.glob` raised :exc:`OSError` when it
encountered a symlink to an overly long path.

..

.. date: 2023-05-07-19-56-45
.. gh-issue: 104265
.. nonce: fVblry
.. section: Library

Prevent possible crash by disallowing instantiation of the
:class:`!_csv.Reader` and :class:`!_csv.Writer` types. The regression was
introduced in 3.10.0a4 with PR 23224 (:issue:`14935`). Patch by Radislav
Chugunov.

..

.. date: 2023-05-01-16-43-28
.. gh-issue: 104035
.. nonce: MrJBw8
.. section: Library

Do not ignore user-defined ``__getstate__`` and ``__setstate__`` methods for
slotted frozen dataclasses.

..

.. date: 2023-04-29-18-23-16
.. gh-issue: 103987
.. nonce: sRgALL
.. section: Library

In :mod:`mmap`, fix several bugs that could lead to access to memory-mapped
files after they have been invalidated.

..

.. date: 2023-04-27-20-03-08
.. gh-issue: 103935
.. nonce: Uaf2M0
.. section: Library

Use :func:`io.open_code` for files to be executed instead of raw
:func:`open`

..

.. date: 2023-04-27-00-45-41
.. gh-issue: 100370
.. nonce: MgZ3KY
.. section: Library

Fix potential :exc:`OverflowError` in :meth:`sqlite3.Connection.blobopen`
for 32-bit builds. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-04-26-09-54-25
.. gh-issue: 103848
.. nonce: aDSnpR
.. section: Library

Add checks to ensure that ``[`` bracketed ``]`` hosts found by
:func:`urllib.parse.urlsplit` are of IPv6 or IPvFuture format.

..

.. date: 2023-04-26-09-38-47
.. gh-issue: 103872
.. nonce: 8LBsDz
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copy of pip to version 23.1.2.

..

.. date: 2023-04-25-19-58-13
.. gh-issue: 103861
.. nonce: JeozgD
.. section: Library

Fix ``zipfile.Zipfile`` creating invalid zip files when ``force_zip64`` was
used to add files to them. Patch by Carey Metcalfe.

..

.. date: 2023-04-24-00-34-23
.. gh-issue: 103685
.. nonce: U14jBM
.. section: Library

Prepare :meth:`tkinter.Menu.index` for Tk 8.7 so that it does not raise
``TclError: expected integer but got ""`` when it should return ``None``.

..

.. date: 2023-04-22-22-14-09
.. gh-issue: 81403
.. nonce: zVz9Td
.. section: Library

:class:`urllib.request.CacheFTPHandler` no longer raises :class:`URLError`
if a cached FTP instance is reused. ftplib's endtransfer method calls
voidresp to drain the connection to handle FTP instance reuse properly.

..

.. date: 2023-04-16-18-29-04
.. gh-issue: 103578
.. nonce: fly1wc
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug where :mod:`pdb` crashes when reading source file with different
encoding by replacing :func:`io.open` with :func:`io.open_code`. The new
method would also call into the hook set by :func:`PyFile_SetOpenCodeHook`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-15-12-19-14
.. gh-issue: 103556
.. nonce: TEf-2m
.. section: Library

Now creating :class:`inspect.Signature` objects with positional-only
parameter with a default followed by a positional-or-keyword parameter
without one is impossible.

..

.. date: 2023-04-15-11-21-38
.. gh-issue: 103559
.. nonce: a9rYHG
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copy of pip to version 23.1.1.

..

.. date: 2023-04-12-17-59-55
.. gh-issue: 103365
.. nonce: UBEE0U
.. section: Library

Set default Flag boundary to ``STRICT`` and fix bitwise operations.

..

.. date: 2023-04-12-13-04-16
.. gh-issue: 103472
.. nonce: C6bOHv
.. section: Library

Avoid a potential :exc:`ResourceWarning` in
:class:`http.client.HTTPConnection` by closing the proxy / tunnel's CONNECT
response explicitly.

..

.. date: 2023-04-11-21-38-39
.. gh-issue: 103449
.. nonce: -nxmhb
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in doc string generation in :func:`dataclasses.dataclass`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-06-17-28-36
.. gh-issue: 103256
.. nonce: 1syxfs
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug that caused :mod:`hmac` to raise an exception when the requested
hash algorithm was not available in OpenSSL despite being available
separately as part of ``hashlib`` itself.  It now falls back properly to the
built-in. This could happen when, for example, your OpenSSL does not include
SHA3 support and you want to compute ``hmac.digest(b'K', b'M',
'sha3_256')``.

..

.. date: 2023-04-05-01-28-53
.. gh-issue: 103225
.. nonce: QD3JVU
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :mod:`pdb` when displaying line numbers of module-level source
code.

..

.. date: 2023-04-04-12-43-38
.. gh-issue: 93910
.. nonce: jurMzv
.. section: Library

Remove deprecation of enum ``memmber.member`` access.

..

.. date: 2023-04-03-23-44-34
.. gh-issue: 102978
.. nonce: gy9eVk
.. section: Library

Fixes :func:`unittest.mock.patch` not enforcing function signatures for
methods decorated with ``@classmethod`` or ``@staticmethod`` when patch is
called with ``autospec=True``.

..

.. date: 2023-04-02-23-05-22
.. gh-issue: 103204
.. nonce: bbDmu0
.. section: Library

Fixes :mod:`http.server` accepting HTTP requests with HTTP version numbers
preceded by '+', or '-', or with digit-separating '_' characters.  The
length of the version numbers is also constrained.

..

.. date: 2023-03-23-15-24-38
.. gh-issue: 102953
.. nonce: YR4KaK
.. section: Library

The extraction methods in :mod:`tarfile`, and :func:`shutil.unpack_archive`,
have a new a *filter* argument that allows limiting tar features than may be
surprising or dangerous, such as creating files outside the destination
directory. See :ref:`tarfile-extraction-filter` for details.

..

.. date: 2023-02-09-22-24-34
.. gh-issue: 101640
.. nonce: oFuEpB
.. section: Library

:class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` now catches errors when writing messages,
such as when :data:`sys.stderr` is ``None``. Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-09-32-07
.. gh-issue: 96522
.. nonce: t73oqp
.. section: Library

Fix potential deadlock in pty.spawn()

..

.. date: 2022-08-27-21-41-41
.. gh-issue: 87474
.. nonce: 9X-kxt
.. section: Library

Fix potential file descriptor leaks in :class:`subprocess.Popen`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-28-21-01-00
.. gh-issue: 89455
.. nonce: qAKRrA
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for the ``max_group_depth`` and
``max_group_width`` parameters and the ``exceptions`` attribute of the
:class:`traceback.TracebackException` class.

..

.. date: 2023-05-28-19-08-42
.. gh-issue: 89412
.. nonce: j4cg7K
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for the ``end_lineno`` and ``end_offset``
attributes of the :class:`traceback.TracebackException` class.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-22-34-31
.. gh-issue: 104943
.. nonce: J2v1Pc
.. section: Documentation

Remove mentions of old Python versions in :class:`typing.NamedTuple`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-14-12-11-28
.. gh-issue: 67056
.. nonce: nVC2Rf
.. section: Documentation

Document that the effect of registering or unregistering an :mod:`atexit`
cleanup function from within a registered cleanup function is undefined.

..

.. date: 2023-04-25-22-58-08
.. gh-issue: 48241
.. nonce: l1Gxxh
.. section: Documentation

Clarifying documentation about the url parameter to urllib.request.urlopen
and urllib.request.Requst needing to be encoded properly.

..

.. date: 2023-05-15-02-22-44
.. gh-issue: 104494
.. nonce: Bkrbfn
.. section: Tests

Update ``test_pack_configure_in`` and ``test_place_configure_in`` for
changes to error message formatting in Tk 8.7.

..

.. date: 2023-05-14-03-00-00
.. gh-issue: 104461
.. nonce: Rmex11
.. section: Tests

Run test_configure_screen on X11 only, since the ``DISPLAY`` environment
variable and ``-screen`` option for toplevels are not useful on Tk for Win32
or Aqua.

..

.. date: 2023-04-08-00-50-23
.. gh-issue: 103329
.. nonce: M38tqF
.. section: Tests

Regression tests for the behaviour of ``unittest.mock.PropertyMock`` were
added.

..

.. date: 2023-02-11-22-36-10
.. gh-issue: 85984
.. nonce: EVXjT9
.. section: Tests

Utilize new "winsize" functions from termios in pty tests.

..

.. date: 2022-11-06-18-42-38
.. gh-issue: 75729
.. nonce: uGYJrv
.. section: Tests

Fix the :func:`os.spawn* <os.spawnl>` tests failing on Windows when the
working directory or interpreter path contains spaces.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-09-08-10
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: 8mmeJQ
.. section: Build

Fix a regression in :file:`configure` where we could end up unintentionally
linking with ``libbsd``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-04-10-56-14
.. gh-issue: 104106
.. nonce: -W9BJS
.. section: Build

Add gcc fallback of mkfifoat/mknodat for macOS. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-02-11-05-31-05
.. gh-issue: 99069
.. nonce: X4LDvY
.. section: Build

Extended workaround defining ``static_assert`` when missing from the libc
headers to all clang and gcc builds. In particular, this fixes building on
macOS <= 10.10.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-16-14-31
.. gh-issue: 105146
.. nonce: gNjqq8
.. section: Windows

Updated the links at the end of the installer to point to Discourse rather
than the mailing lists.

..

.. date: 2023-05-18-22-46-03
.. gh-issue: 104623
.. nonce: HJZhm1
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.42.0.

..

.. date: 2023-03-24-11-25-28
.. gh-issue: 102997
.. nonce: dredy2
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.41.2.

..

.. date: 2023-03-18-21-38-00
.. gh-issue: 88013
.. nonce: Z3loxC
.. section: Windows

Fixed a bug where :exc:`TypeError` was raised when calling
:func:`ntpath.realpath` with a bytes parameter in some cases.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-23-30-46
.. gh-issue: 103142
.. nonce: 55lMXQ
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 1.1.1u.

..

.. date: 2023-05-18-22-31-49
.. gh-issue: 104623
.. nonce: 6h7Xfx
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to SQLite 3.42.0.

..

.. date: 2023-03-24-11-20-47
.. gh-issue: 102997
.. nonce: ZgQkbq
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to SQLite 3.41.2.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-17-19-49
.. gh-issue: 104719
.. nonce: rvYXH-
.. section: IDLE

Remove IDLE's modification of tokenize.tabsize and test other uses of
tokenize data and methods.

..

.. date: 2023-05-17-17-32-21
.. gh-issue: 104499
.. nonce: hNeqV4
.. section: IDLE

Fix completions for Tk Aqua 8.7 (currently blank).

..

.. date: 2023-05-17-15-11-11
.. gh-issue: 104496
.. nonce: wjav-y
.. section: IDLE

About prints both tcl and tk versions if different (expected someday).

..

.. date: 2023-04-30-20-01-18
.. gh-issue: 88496
.. nonce: y65vUb
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE test hang on macOS.
