.. date: 2025-04-07-04-11-08
.. gh-issue: 131809
.. nonce: 4MBDuy
.. release date: 2025-04-08
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.1

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-23-28-39
.. gh-issue: 131261
.. nonce: 0aB6nM
.. section: Security

Upgrade to libexpat 2.7.0

..

.. date: 2025-01-28-14-08-03
.. gh-issue: 105704
.. nonce: EnhHxu
.. section: Security

When using :func:`urllib.parse.urlsplit` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlparse`
host parsing would not reject domain names containing square brackets (``[``
and ``]``). Square brackets are only valid for IPv6 and IPvFuture hosts
according to `RFC 3986 Section 3.2.2
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.2.2>`__.

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-12-27-34
.. gh-issue: 121284
.. nonce: 8rwPxe
.. section: Security

Fix bug in the folding of rfc2047 encoded-words when flattening an email
message using a modern email policy. Previously when an encoded-word was too
long for a line, it would be decoded, split across lines, and re-encoded.
But commas and other special characters in the original text could be left
unencoded and unquoted. This could theoretically be used to spoof header
lines using a carefully constructed encoded-word if the resulting rendered
email was transmitted or re-parsed.

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-11-43-08
.. gh-issue: 80222
.. nonce: wfR4BU
.. section: Security

Fix bug in the folding of quoted strings when flattening an email message
using a modern email policy. Previously when a quoted string was folded so
that it spanned more than one line, the surrounding quotes and internal
escapes would be omitted. This could theoretically be used to spoof header
lines using a carefully constructed quoted string if the resulting rendered
email was transmitted or re-parsed.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-21-00-52
.. gh-issue: 119511
.. nonce: jKrXQ8
.. section: Security

Fix a potential denial of service in the :mod:`imaplib` module. When
connecting to a malicious server, it could cause an arbitrary amount of
memory to be allocated. On many systems this is harmless as unused virtual
memory is only a mapping, but if this hit a virtual address size limit it
could lead to a :exc:`MemoryError` or other process crash. On unusual
systems or builds where all allocated memory is touched and backed by actual
ram or storage it could've consumed resources doing so until similarly
crashing.

..

.. date: 2024-11-28-14-14-46
.. gh-issue: 127257
.. nonce: n6-jU9
.. section: Library

In :mod:`ssl`, system call failures that OpenSSL reports using
``ERR_LIB_SYS`` are now raised as :exc:`OSError`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-12-22-48
.. gh-issue: 121277
.. nonce: wF_zKd
.. section: Documentation

Writers of CPython's documentation can now use ``next`` as the version for
the ``versionchanged``, ``versionadded``, ``deprecated`` directives.

..

.. date: 2024-04-05-14-32-21
.. gh-issue: 106883
.. nonce: OKmc0Q
.. section: C API

Disable GC during the _PyThread_CurrentFrames() and
_PyThread_CurrentExceptions() calls to avoid the interpreter to deadlock.
