.. date: 2024-09-04-11-55-29
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: 8P4bmN
.. release date: 2024-09-06
.. section: macOS

Updated macOS installer build to use OpenSSL 3.0.15.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-09-59-18
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: QaMC12
.. section: Windows

Updated Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.15.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-21-50-54
.. gh-issue: 100256
.. nonce: GDrKba
.. section: Windows

:mod:`mimetypes` no longer fails when it encounters an inaccessible registry
key.

..

.. date: 2022-04-20-18-32-30
.. gh-issue: 79846
.. nonce: Vggv3f
.. section: Windows

Makes :code:`ssl.create_default_context()` ignore invalid certificates in
the Windows certificate store

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-10-07-51
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: 1eIFZb
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 3.0.15 and multissltests to use
3.0.15, 3.1.7, and 3.2.3.

..

.. date: 2024-05-04-22-56-41
.. gh-issue: 101525
.. nonce: LHK166
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_gdb`` if the binary is relocated by BOLT. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-12-41-35
.. gh-issue: 123678
.. nonce: N41y9n
.. section: Security

Upgrade libexpat to 2.6.3

..

.. date: 2024-07-02-13-39-20
.. gh-issue: 121285
.. nonce: hrl-yI
.. section: Security

Remove backtracking from tarfile header parsing for ``hdrcharset``, PAX, and
GNU sparse headers.

..

.. date: 2024-08-26-13-45-20
.. gh-issue: 123270
.. nonce: gXHvNJ
.. section: Library

Applied a more surgical fix for malformed payloads in :class:`zipfile.Path`
causing infinite loops (gh-122905) without breaking contents using
legitimate characters.

..

.. date: 2024-08-22-09-37-48
.. gh-issue: 123213
.. nonce: owmXnP
.. section: Library

:meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.extend` and
:class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.Element` assignment no longer hide the
internal exception if an erronous generator is passed. Patch by Bar Harel.

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-18-02-27
.. gh-issue: 85110
.. nonce: 8_iDQy
.. section: Library

Preserve relative path in URL without netloc in
:func:`urllib.parse.urlunsplit` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlunparse`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-16-19-13-21
.. gh-issue: 123067
.. nonce: Nx9O4R
.. section: Library

Fix quadratic complexity in parsing ``"``-quoted cookie values with
backslashes by :mod:`http.cookies`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-11-14-23-07
.. gh-issue: 122903
.. nonce: xktZta
.. section: Library

``zipfile.Path.glob`` now correctly matches directories instead of silently
omitting them.

..

.. date: 2024-08-11-14-08-04
.. gh-issue: 122905
.. nonce: 7tDsxA
.. section: Library

:class:`zipfile.Path` objects now sanitize names from the zipfile.

..

.. date: 2024-08-08-15-05-58
.. gh-issue: 122695
.. nonce: f7pwBv
.. section: Library

Fixed double-free when using :func:`gc.get_referents` with a freed
:class:`asyncio.Future` iterator.

..

.. date: 2024-08-07-17-41-16
.. gh-issue: 116263
.. nonce: EcXir0
.. section: Library

:class:`logging.handlers.RotatingFileHandler` no longer rolls over empty log
files.

..

.. date: 2024-08-04-14-07-18
.. gh-issue: 118814
.. nonce: uiyks1
.. section: Library

Fix the :class:`typing.TypeVar` constructor when name is passed by keyword.

..

.. date: 2024-07-31-20-43-21
.. gh-issue: 122478
.. nonce: sCU2Le
.. section: Library

Remove internal frames from tracebacks shown in
:class:`code.InteractiveInterpreter` with non-default
:func:`sys.excepthook`. Save correct tracebacks in
:attr:`sys.last_traceback` and update ``__traceback__`` attribute of
:attr:`sys.last_value` and :attr:`sys.last_exc`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-08-14-04
.. gh-issue: 113785
.. nonce: 6B_KNB
.. section: Library

:mod:`csv` now correctly parses numeric fields (when used with
:const:`csv.QUOTE_NONNUMERIC`) which start with an escape character.

..

.. date: 2023-12-17-10-22-55
.. gh-issue: 112182
.. nonce: jLWGlr
.. section: Library

:meth:`!asyncio.futures.Future.set_exception` now transforms
:exc:`StopIteration` into :exc:`RuntimeError` instead of hanging or other
misbehavior. Patch contributed by Jamie Phan.

..

.. date: 2023-12-12-15-19-58
.. gh-issue: 108172
.. nonce: KyDPuG
.. section: Library

``webbrowser`` honors OS preferred browser on Linux when its desktop entry
name contains the text of a known browser name.

..

.. date: 2023-10-20-15-28-08
.. gh-issue: 102988
.. nonce: dStNO7
.. section: Library

:func:`email.utils.getaddresses` and :func:`email.utils.parseaddr` now
return ``('', '')`` 2-tuples in more situations where invalid email
addresses are encountered instead of potentially inaccurate values. Add
optional *strict* parameter to these two functions: use ``strict=False`` to
get the old behavior, accept malformed inputs. ``getattr(email.utils,
'supports_strict_parsing', False)`` can be use to check if the *strict*
paramater is available. Patch by Thomas Dwyer and Victor Stinner to improve
the CVE-2023-27043 fix.

..

.. date: 2023-08-04-18-43-21
.. gh-issue: 99437
.. nonce: Et8hu8
.. section: Library

:func:`runpy.run_path` now decodes path-like objects, making sure __file__
and sys.argv[0] of the module being run are always strings.

..

.. date: 2024-06-16-21-42-45
.. gh-issue: 120083
.. nonce: nczuyv
.. section: IDLE

Add explicit black IDLE Hovertip foreground color needed for recent macOS.
Fixes Sonoma showing unreadable white on pale yellow.  Patch by John
Riggles.

..

.. date: 2024-08-26-00-58-26
.. gh-issue: 123321
.. nonce: ApxcnE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent Parser/myreadline race condition from segfaulting on multi-threaded
use. Patch by Bar Harel and Amit Wienner.

..

.. date: 2024-08-25-10-54-22
.. gh-issue: 122982
.. nonce: KLD91q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extend the deprecation period for bool inversion (``~``) by two years.

..

.. date: 2024-08-23-13-08-27
.. gh-issue: 123229
.. nonce: aHm-dw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix valgrind warning by initializing the f-string buffers to 0 in the
tokenizer. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-12-29-52
.. gh-issue: 123142
.. nonce: 3PXiNb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix too-wide source location in exception tracebacks coming from broken
iterables in comprehensions.

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-11-09-16
.. gh-issue: 123048
.. nonce: 2TISpv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug where pattern matching code could emit a :opcode:`JUMP_FORWARD`
with no source location.

..

.. date: 2024-08-17-17-26-25
.. gh-issue: 123083
.. nonce: 9xWLJ-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential use-after-free in ``STORE_ATTR_WITH_HINT``.

..

.. date: 2024-08-01-19-13-58
.. gh-issue: 122527
.. nonce: eztso6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash that occurred when a ``PyStructSequence`` was deallocated after
its type's dictionary was cleared by the GC.  The type's
:c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_basicsize` now accounts for non-sequence fields
that aren't included in the :c:macro:`Py_SIZE` of the sequence.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-18-29-18
.. gh-issue: 93691
.. nonce: 6OautB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source locations of instructions generated for with statements.

..

.. date: 2024-08-24-19-09-31
.. gh-issue: 123297
.. nonce: fdtXoe
.. section: Build

Propagate the value of ``LDFLAGS`` to ``LDCXXSHARED`` in :mod:`sysconfig`.
Patch by Pablo Galindo
