.. date: 2024-09-24-10-48-46
.. gh-issue: 124448
.. nonce: bFMrS6
.. release date: 2024-12-03
.. section: macOS

Update bundled Tcl/Tk in macOS installer to 8.6.15.

..

.. date: 2024-11-16-22-08-41
.. gh-issue: 126911
.. nonce: HchCZZ
.. section: Windows

Update credits command output.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-19-48-03
.. gh-issue: 125315
.. nonce: jdB9qN
.. section: Windows

Avoid crashing in :mod:`platform` due to slow WMI calls on some Windows
machines.

..

.. date: 2024-10-15-21-28-43
.. gh-issue: 125550
.. nonce: hmGWCP
.. section: Windows

Enable the :ref:`launcher` to detect Python 3.14 installs from the Windows
Store.

..

.. date: 2024-09-24-19-04-56
.. gh-issue: 124448
.. nonce: srVT3d
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled Tcl/Tk to 8.6.15.

..

.. date: 2024-11-13-22-23-36
.. gh-issue: 126807
.. nonce: vpaWuN
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix extraction warnings in :program:`pygettext.py` caused by mistaking
function definitions for function calls.

..

.. date: 2024-11-17-16-56-48
.. gh-issue: 126909
.. nonce: 60VTxW
.. section: Tests

Fix test_os extended attribute tests to work on filesystems with 1 KiB xattr
size limit.

..

.. date: 2024-10-07-14-13-38
.. gh-issue: 125041
.. nonce: PKLWDf
.. section: Tests

Re-enable skipped tests for :mod:`zlib` on the s390x architecture: only skip
checks of the compressed bytes, which can be different between zlib's
software implementation and the hardware-accelerated implementation.

..

.. date: 2024-09-30-22-52-44
.. gh-issue: 124295
.. nonce: VZy5kx
.. section: Tests

Add translation tests to the :mod:`argparse` module.

..

.. date: 2024-11-13-11-09-12
.. gh-issue: 126623
.. nonce: TO7NnR
.. section: Security

Upgrade libexpat to 2.6.4

..

.. date: 2024-11-27-16-06-10
.. gh-issue: 127303
.. nonce: asqkgh
.. section: Library

Publicly expose :data:`~token.EXACT_TOKEN_TYPES` in :attr:`!token.__all__`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-27-14-06-35
.. gh-issue: 123967
.. nonce: wxUmnW
.. section: Library

Fix faulthandler for trampoline frames. If the top-most frame is a
trampoline frame, skip it. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-11-24-14-20-17
.. gh-issue: 127182
.. nonce: WmfY2g
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!io.StringIO.__setstate__` crash, when :const:`None` was passed
as the first value.

..

.. date: 2024-11-24-12-41-31
.. gh-issue: 127217
.. nonce: UAXGFr
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`urllib.request.pathname2url` for paths starting with multiple
slashes on Posix.

..

.. date: 2024-11-22-10-42-34
.. gh-issue: 127035
.. nonce: UnbDlr
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`shutil.which` on Windows. Now it looks at direct match if and only
if the command ends with a PATHEXT extension or X_OK is not in mode. Support
extensionless files if "." is in PATHEXT. Support PATHEXT extensions that
end with a dot.

..

.. date: 2024-11-22-03-40-02
.. gh-issue: 127078
.. nonce: gI_PaP
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` failed to discard an
extra slash before a UNC drive in the URL path on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-11-22-02-31-55
.. gh-issue: 126766
.. nonce: jfkhBH
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` failed to discard any
'localhost' authority present in the URL.

..

.. date: 2024-11-20-16-58-59
.. gh-issue: 126997
.. nonce: 0PI41Y
.. section: Library

Fix support of STRING and GLOBAL opcodes with non-ASCII arguments in
:mod:`pickletools`. :func:`pickletools.dis` now outputs non-ASCII bytes in
STRING, BINSTRING and SHORT_BINSTRING arguments as escaped (``\xXX``).

..

.. date: 2024-11-20-08-54-11
.. gh-issue: 126618
.. nonce: ef_53g
.. section: Library

Fix the representation of :class:`itertools.count` objects when the count
value is :data:`sys.maxsize`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-15-01-50-36
.. gh-issue: 85168
.. nonce: bP8VIN
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` and
:func:`~urllib.request.pathname2url` always used UTF-8 when quoting and
unquoting file URIs. They now use the :term:`filesystem encoding and error
handler`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-14-22-25-49
.. gh-issue: 67877
.. nonce: G9hw0w
.. section: Library

Fix memory leaks when :mod:`regular expression <re>` matching terminates
abruptly, either because of a signal or because memory allocation fails.

..

.. date: 2024-11-13-22-25-57
.. gh-issue: 126789
.. nonce: lKzlc7
.. section: Library

Fixed the values of :py:func:`sysconfig.get_config_vars`,
:py:func:`sysconfig.get_paths`, and their siblings when the :py:mod:`site`
initialization happens after :py:mod:`sysconfig` has built a cache for
:py:func:`sysconfig.get_config_vars`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-13-20-03-18
.. gh-issue: 126188
.. nonce: RJLKk-
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 24.3.1

..

.. date: 2024-11-12-21-43-12
.. gh-issue: 126766
.. nonce: oi2KJ7
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` failed to discard two
leading slashes introducing an empty authority section.

..

.. date: 2024-11-12-13-14-47
.. gh-issue: 126727
.. nonce: 5Eqfqd
.. section: Library

``locale.nl_langinfo(locale.ERA)`` now returns multiple era description
segments separated by semicolons. Previously it only returned the first
segment on platforms with Glibc.

..

.. date: 2024-11-11-13-24-22
.. gh-issue: 126699
.. nonce: ONGbMd
.. section: Library

Allow :class:`collections.abc.AsyncIterator` to be a base for Protocols.

..

.. date: 2024-11-10-18-14-51
.. gh-issue: 104745
.. nonce: zAa5Ke
.. section: Library

Limit starting a patcher (from :func:`unittest.mock.patch` or
:func:`unittest.mock.patch.object`) more than once without stopping it

..

.. date: 2024-11-09-10-31-10
.. gh-issue: 126595
.. nonce: A-7MyC
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when instantiating :class:`itertools.count` with an initial
count of :data:`sys.maxsize` on debug builds. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-11-08-17-05-10
.. gh-issue: 120423
.. nonce: 7rdLVV
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.pathname2url` mishandled Windows paths
with embedded forward slashes.

..

.. date: 2024-11-08-11-06-14
.. gh-issue: 126565
.. nonce: dFFO22
.. section: Library

Improve performances of :meth:`zipfile.Path.open` for non-reading modes.

..

.. date: 2024-11-07-22-41-47
.. gh-issue: 126505
.. nonce: iztYE1
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in compiling case-insensitive :mod:`regular expressions <re>` with
character classes containing non-BMP characters: upper-case non-BMP
character did was ignored and the ASCII flag was ignored when matching a
character range whose upper bound is beyond the BMP region.

..

.. date: 2024-11-07-01-40-11
.. gh-issue: 117378
.. nonce: o9O5uM
.. section: Library

Fixed the :mod:`multiprocessing` ``"forkserver"`` start method forkserver
process to correctly inherit the parent's :data:`sys.path` during the
importing of :func:`multiprocessing.set_forkserver_preload` modules in the
same manner as :data:`sys.path` is configured in workers before executing
work items.

This bug caused some forkserver module preloading to silently fail to
preload. This manifested as a performance degration in child processes when
the ``sys.path`` was required due to additional repeated work in every
worker.

It could also have a side effect of ``""`` remaining in :data:`sys.path`
during forkserver preload imports instead of the absolute path from
:func:`os.getcwd` at multiprocessing import time used in the worker
``sys.path``.

The ``sys.path`` differences between phases in the child process could
potentially have caused preload to import incorrect things from the wrong
location.  We are unaware of that actually having happened in practice.

..

.. date: 2024-11-06-23-40-28
.. gh-issue: 125679
.. nonce: Qq9xF5
.. section: Library

The :class:`multiprocessing.Lock` and :class:`multiprocessing.RLock`
``repr`` values no longer say "unknown" on macOS.

..

.. date: 2024-11-06-18-30-50
.. gh-issue: 126476
.. nonce: F1wh3c
.. section: Library

Raise :class:`calendar.IllegalMonthError` (now a subclass of
:class:`IndexError`) for :func:`calendar.month` when the input month is not
correct.

..

.. date: 2024-11-06-13-41-38
.. gh-issue: 126489
.. nonce: toaf-0
.. section: Library

The Python implementation of :mod:`pickle` no longer calls
:meth:`pickle.Pickler.persistent_id` for the result of
:meth:`!persistent_id`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-02-19-20-44
.. gh-issue: 126303
.. nonce: yVvyWB
.. section: Library

Fix pickling and copying of :class:`os.sched_param` objects.

..

.. date: 2024-11-01-14-31-41
.. gh-issue: 126138
.. nonce: yTniOG
.. section: Library

Fix a use-after-free crash on :class:`asyncio.Task` objects whose underlying
coroutine yields an object that implements an evil
:meth:`~object.__getattribute__`. Patch by Nico Posada.

..

.. date: 2024-10-31-14-06-28
.. gh-issue: 126220
.. nonce: uJAJCU
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :class:`!cProfile.Profile` and :class:`!_lsprof.Profiler` when
their callbacks were directly called with 0 arguments.

..

.. date: 2024-10-30-23-59-36
.. gh-issue: 126212
.. nonce: _9uYjT
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.pathname2url` and
:func:`~urllib.request.url2pathname` removed slashes from Windows DOS drive
paths and URLs.

..

.. date: 2024-10-30-20-45-17
.. gh-issue: 126205
.. nonce: CHEmtx
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.pathname2url` generated URLs beginning
with four slashes (rather than two) when given a Windows UNC path.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-11-45-44
.. gh-issue: 126105
.. nonce: cOL-R6
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :mod:`ast` when the :attr:`ast.AST._fields` attribute is
deleted.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-10-58-52
.. gh-issue: 126106
.. nonce: rlF798
.. section: Library

Fixes a possible ``NULL`` pointer dereference in :mod:`ssl`.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-10-38-28
.. gh-issue: 126080
.. nonce: qKRBuo
.. section: Library

Fix a use-after-free crash on :class:`asyncio.Task` objects for which the
underlying event loop implements an evil :meth:`~object.__getattribute__`.
Reported by Nico-Posada. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-28-22-35-22
.. gh-issue: 126083
.. nonce: TuI--n
.. section: Library

Fixed a reference leak in :class:`asyncio.Task` objects when reinitializing
the same object with a non-``None`` context. Patch by Nico Posada.

..

.. date: 2024-10-26-12-50-48
.. gh-issue: 125984
.. nonce: d4vp5_
.. section: Library

Fix use-after-free crashes on :class:`asyncio.Future` objects for which the
underlying event loop implements an evil :meth:`~object.__getattribute__`.
Reported by Nico-Posada. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-25-11-13-24
.. gh-issue: 125969
.. nonce: YvbrTr
.. section: Library

Fix an out-of-bounds crash when an evil :meth:`asyncio.loop.call_soon`
mutates the length of the internal callbacks list. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-25-10-53-56
.. gh-issue: 125966
.. nonce: eOCYU_
.. section: Library

Fix a use-after-free crash in :meth:`asyncio.Future.remove_done_callback`.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-24-14-08-10
.. gh-issue: 125789
.. nonce: eaiAMw
.. section: Library

Fix possible crash when mutating list of callbacks returned by
:attr:`!asyncio.Future._callbacks`. It now always returns a new copy in C
implementation :mod:`!_asyncio`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2024-10-24-10-49-47
.. gh-issue: 124452
.. nonce: eqTRgx
.. section: Library

Fix an issue in :meth:`email.policy.EmailPolicy.header_source_parse` and
:meth:`email.policy.Compat32.header_source_parse` that introduced spurious
leading whitespaces into header values when the header includes a newline
character after the header name delimiter (``:``) and before the value.

..

.. date: 2024-10-23-17-45-40
.. gh-issue: 125884
.. nonce: 41E_PD
.. section: Library

Fixed the bug for :mod:`pdb` where it can't set breakpoints on functions
with certain annotations.

..

.. date: 2024-10-22-13-28-00
.. gh-issue: 125355
.. nonce: zssHm_
.. section: Library

Fix several bugs in :meth:`argparse.ArgumentParser.parse_intermixed_args`.

* The parser no longer changes temporarily during parsing.
* Default values are not processed twice.
* Required mutually exclusive groups containing positional arguments are now supported.
* The missing arguments report now includes the names of all required optional and positional arguments.
* Unknown options can be intermixed with positional arguments in parse_known_intermixed_args().

..

.. date: 2024-10-18-09-51-29
.. gh-issue: 125682
.. nonce: vsj4cU
.. section: Library

Reject non-ASCII digits in the Python implementation of :func:`json.loads`
conforming to the JSON specification.

..

.. date: 2024-10-18-08-58-10
.. gh-issue: 125660
.. nonce: sDdDqO
.. section: Library

Reject invalid unicode escapes for Python implementation of
:func:`json.loads`.

..

.. date: 2024-10-17-16-10-29
.. gh-issue: 125259
.. nonce: oMew0c
.. section: Library

Fix the notes removal logic for errors thrown in enum initialization.

..

.. date: 2024-10-15-14-01-03
.. gh-issue: 125519
.. nonce: TqGh6a
.. section: Library

Improve traceback if :func:`importlib.reload` is called with an object that
is not a module. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-10-14-17-29-34
.. gh-issue: 125451
.. nonce: fmP3T9
.. section: Library

Fix deadlock when :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` shuts down
concurrently with an error when feeding a job to a worker process.

..

.. date: 2024-10-14-04-44-12
.. gh-issue: 125422
.. nonce: MlVuC6
.. section: Library

Fixed the bug where :mod:`pdb` and :mod:`bdb` can step into the bottom
caller frame.

..

.. date: 2024-10-14-02-27-03
.. gh-issue: 100141
.. nonce: NuAcwa
.. section: Library

Fixed the bug where :mod:`pdb` will be stuck in an infinite loop when
debugging an empty file.

..

.. date: 2024-10-13-20-21-35
.. gh-issue: 53203
.. nonce: Rz1c8A
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`time.strptime` for ``%c``, ``%x`` and ``%X`` formats in many
locales that use non-ASCII digits, like Persian, Burmese, Odia and Shan.

..

.. date: 2024-10-10-19-57-35
.. gh-issue: 125254
.. nonce: RtZxXS
.. section: Library

Fix a bug where ArgumentError includes the incorrect ambiguous option in
:mod:`argparse`.

..

.. date: 2024-10-09-21-42-43
.. gh-issue: 61011
.. nonce: pQXZb1
.. section: Library

Fix inheritance of nested mutually exclusive groups from parent parser in
:class:`argparse.ArgumentParser`. Previously, all nested mutually exclusive
groups lost their connection to the group containing them and were displayed
as belonging directly to the parser.

..

.. date: 2024-10-09-17-07-33
.. gh-issue: 52551
.. nonce: PBakSY
.. section: Library

Fix encoding issues in :func:`time.strftime`, the
:meth:`~datetime.datetime.strftime` method of the :mod:`datetime` classes
:class:`~datetime.datetime`, :class:`~datetime.date` and
:class:`~datetime.time` and formatting of these classes. Characters not
encodable in the current locale are now acceptable in the format string.
Surrogate pairs and sequence of surrogatescape-encoded bytes are no longer
recombinated. Embedded null character no longer terminates the format
string.

..

.. date: 2024-10-09-07-09-00
.. gh-issue: 125118
.. nonce: J9rQ1S
.. section: Library

Don't copy arbitrary values to :c:expr:`_Bool` in the :mod:`struct` module.

..

.. date: 2024-10-08-21-17-16
.. gh-issue: 125069
.. nonce: 0RP0Mx
.. section: Library

Fix an issue where providing a :class:`pathlib.PurePath` object as an
initializer argument to a second :class:`~pathlib.PurePath` object with a
different flavour resulted in arguments to the former object's initializer
being joined by the latter object's flavour.

..

.. date: 2024-10-08-12-09-09
.. gh-issue: 124969
.. nonce: _VBQLq
.. section: Library

Fix ``locale.nl_langinfo(locale.ALT_DIGITS)`` on platforms with glibc. Now
it returns a string consisting of up to 100 semicolon-separated symbols (an
empty string in most locales) on all Posix platforms. Previously it only
returned the first symbol or an empty string.

..

.. date: 2024-10-04-08-46-00
.. gh-issue: 124958
.. nonce: rea9-x
.. section: Library

Fix refcycles in exceptions raised from :class:`asyncio.TaskGroup` and the
python implementation of :class:`asyncio.Future`

..

.. date: 2024-10-03-20-45-57
.. gh-issue: 53203
.. nonce: 3Sk4Ia
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`time.strptime` for ``%c`` and ``%x`` formats in many locales:
Arabic, Bislama, Breton, Bodo, Kashubian, Chuvash, Estonian, French, Irish,
Ge'ez, Gurajati, Manx Gaelic, Hebrew, Hindi, Chhattisgarhi, Haitian Kreyol,
Japanese, Kannada, Korean, Marathi, Malay, Norwegian, Nynorsk, Punjabi,
Rajasthani, Tok Pisin, Yoruba, Yue Chinese, Yau/Nungon and Chinese.

..

.. date: 2024-10-02-21-11-18
.. gh-issue: 124917
.. nonce: Lnwh5b
.. section: Library

Allow calling :func:`os.path.exists` and :func:`os.path.lexists` with
keyword arguments on Windows. Fixes a regression in 3.12.4.

..

.. date: 2024-10-02-15-05-45
.. gh-issue: 124653
.. nonce: tqsTu9
.. section: Library

Fix detection of the minimal Queue API needed by the :mod:`logging` module.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-01-17-12-20
.. gh-issue: 124858
.. nonce: Zy0tvT
.. section: Library

Fix reference cycles left in tracebacks in :func:`asyncio.open_connection`
when used with ``happy_eyeballs_delay``

..

.. date: 2024-10-01-13-46-58
.. gh-issue: 124390
.. nonce: dK1Zcm
.. section: Library

Fixed :exc:`AssertionError` when using
:func:`!asyncio.staggered.staggered_race` with
:attr:`asyncio.eager_task_factory`.

..

.. date: 2024-09-28-02-03-04
.. gh-issue: 124651
.. nonce: bLBGtH
.. section: Library

Properly quote template strings in :mod:`venv` activation scripts.

..

.. date: 2024-09-26-13-43-39
.. gh-issue: 124594
.. nonce: peYhsP
.. section: Library

All :mod:`asyncio` REPL prompts run in the same :class:`context
<contextvars.Context>`. Contributed by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-18-07-51
.. gh-issue: 120378
.. nonce: NlBSz_
.. section: Library

Fix a crash related to an integer overflow in :func:`curses.resizeterm` and
:func:`curses.resize_term`.

..

.. date: 2024-09-24-22-38-51
.. gh-issue: 123884
.. nonce: iEPTK4
.. section: Library

Fixed bug in itertools.tee() handling of other tee inputs (a tee in a tee).
The output now has the promised *n* independent new iterators.  Formerly,
the first iterator was identical (not independent) to the input iterator.
This would sometimes give surprising results.

..

.. date: 2024-09-16-12-31-48
.. gh-issue: 123978
.. nonce: z3smEu
.. section: Library

Remove broken :func:`time.thread_time` and :func:`time.thread_time_ns` on
NetBSD.

..

.. date: 2024-09-13-18-24-27
.. gh-issue: 124008
.. nonce: XaiPQx
.. section: Library

Fix possible crash (in debug build), incorrect output or returning incorrect
value from raw binary ``write()`` when writing to console on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-08-28-19-27-35
.. gh-issue: 123370
.. nonce: SPZ9Ux
.. section: Library

Fix the canvas not clearing after running turtledemo clock.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-02-24-50
.. gh-issue: 120754
.. nonce: nHb5mG
.. section: Library

Update unbounded ``read`` calls in :mod:`zipfile` to specify an explicit
``size`` putting a limit on how much data they may read. This also updates
handling around ZIP max comment size to match the standard instead of
reading comments that are one byte too long.

..

.. date: 2024-06-06-04-06-05
.. gh-issue: 70764
.. nonce: 6511hw
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue where :func:`inspect.getclosurevars` would incorrectly
classify an attribute name as a global variable when the name exists both as
an attribute name and a global variable.

..

.. date: 2024-06-02-11-48-19
.. gh-issue: 119826
.. nonce: N1obGa
.. section: Library

Always return an absolute path for :func:`os.path.abspath` on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-04-19-05-58-50
.. gh-issue: 117766
.. nonce: J3xepp
.. section: Library

Always use :func:`str` to print ``choices`` in :mod:`argparse`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-26-16-36-22
.. gh-issue: 101955
.. nonce: Ixu3IF
.. section: Library

Fix SystemError when match regular expression pattern containing some
combination of possessive quantifier, alternative and capture group.

..

.. date: 2023-02-15-23-54-42
.. gh-issue: 88110
.. nonce: KU6erv
.. section: Library

Fixed :class:`multiprocessing.Process` reporting a ``.exitcode`` of 1 even
on success when using the ``"fork"`` start method while using a
:class:`concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-15-10-18-20
.. gh-issue: 71936
.. nonce: MzJjc_
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in :class:`multiprocessing.pool.Pool`.

..

.. bpo: 46128
.. date: 2021-12-19-10-47-24
.. nonce: Qv3EK1
.. section: Library

Strip :class:`unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` stack frames from reported
stacktraces.

..

.. bpo: 14074
.. date: 2018-12-04-07-36-27
.. nonce: fMLKCu
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`argparse` metavar processing to allow positional arguments to have
a tuple metavar.

..

.. date: 2024-10-04-15-34-34
.. gh-issue: 122392
.. nonce: V8K3w2
.. section: IDLE

Increase currently inadequate vertical spacing for the IDLE browsers (path,
module, and stack) on high-resolution monitors.

..

.. date: 2024-10-10-23-46-54
.. gh-issue: 125277
.. nonce: QAby09
.. section: Documentation

Require Sphinx 7.2.6 or later to build the Python documentation. Patch by
Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2024-10-07-00-31-17
.. gh-issue: 125018
.. nonce: yKnymn
.. section: Documentation

The :mod:`importlib.metadata` documentation now includes semantic
cross-reference targets for the significant documented APIs. This means
intersphinx references like :func:`importlib.metadata.version` will now work
as expected.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-12-22-48
.. gh-issue: 121277
.. nonce: wF_zKd
.. section: Documentation

Writers of CPython's documentation can now use ``next`` as the version for
the ``versionchanged``, ``versionadded``, ``deprecated`` directives.

..

.. date: 2023-03-28-22-24-45
.. gh-issue: 60712
.. nonce: So5uad
.. section: Documentation

Include the :class:`object` type in the lists of documented types. Change by
Furkan Onder and Martin Panter.

..

.. date: 2024-11-24-07-01-28
.. gh-issue: 113841
.. nonce: WFg-Bu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible undefined behavior division by zero in :class:`complex`'s
:c:func:`_Py_c_pow`.

..

.. date: 2024-11-12-19-24-00
.. gh-issue: 126341
.. nonce: 5SdAe1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now :exc:`ValueError` is raised instead of :exc:`SystemError` when trying to
iterate over a released :class:`memoryview` object.

..

.. date: 2024-11-09-16-10-22
.. gh-issue: 126066
.. nonce: 9zs4m4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :mod:`importlib` to not write an incomplete .pyc files when a ulimit or
some other operating system mechanism is preventing the write to go through
fully.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-15-17-31
.. gh-issue: 126139
.. nonce: B4OQ8a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Provide better error location when attempting to use a :term:`future
statement <__future__>` with an unknown future feature.

..

.. date: 2024-10-05-23-53-06
.. gh-issue: 125008
.. nonce: ETANpd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`tokenize.untokenize` producing invalid syntax for double braces
preceded by certain escape characters.

..

.. date: 2024-10-03-14-39-41
.. gh-issue: 123378
.. nonce: dCxANf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the :meth:`~object.__str__` method of :exc:`UnicodeError`
objects when the :attr:`UnicodeError.start` and :attr:`UnicodeError.end`
values are invalid or out-of-range. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-09-26-18-21-06
.. gh-issue: 116510
.. nonce: FacUWO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash caused by immortal interned strings being shared between
sub-interpreters that use basic single-phase init.  In that case, the string
can be used by an interpreter that outlives the interpreter that created and
interned it.  For interpreters that share obmalloc state, also share the
interned dict with the main interpreter.

..

.. date: 2024-05-12-03-10-36
.. gh-issue: 118950
.. nonce: 5Wc4vp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where SSLProtocol.connection_lost wasn't getting called when OSError
was thrown on writing to socket.

..

.. date: 2023-12-30-00-21-45
.. gh-issue: 113570
.. nonce: _XQgsW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug in ``reprlib.repr`` where it incorrectly called the repr method
on shadowed Python built-in types.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-21-01-56
.. gh-issue: 109746
.. nonce: 32MHt9
.. section: Core and Builtins

If :func:`!_thread.start_new_thread` fails to start a new thread, it deletes
its state from interpreter and thus avoids its repeated cleanup on
finalization.

..

.. date: 2024-07-04-13-23-27
.. gh-issue: 113601
.. nonce: K3RLqp
.. section: C API

Removed debug build assertions related to interning strings, which were
falsely triggered by stable ABI extensions.

..

.. date: 2024-11-04-09-42-04
.. gh-issue: 89640
.. nonce: QBv05o
.. section: Build

Hard-code float word ordering as little endian on WASM.

..

.. date: 2024-10-16-09-37-51
.. gh-issue: 89640
.. nonce: UDsW-j
.. section: Build

Improve detection of float word ordering on Linux when link-time
optimizations are enabled.
