.. date: 2025-04-06-23-39-47
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: 2JI7iE
.. release date: 2025-04-08
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 8.6.16.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-24-00
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: 4UcBKy
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.16. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-48
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: VmKQkv
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-02-10-22-08-37
.. gh-issue: 91132
.. nonce: 00x1MI
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use ncurses 6.5.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-13-22-55
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: vI-LqV
.. section: Windows

Update bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.16. The new build also disables
uplink support, which may be relevant to embedders but has no impact on
normal use.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-31
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: hlS5EC
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-19-57-35
.. gh-issue: 131020
.. nonce: _c87wf
.. section: Windows

:source:`pylauncher <PC/launcher2.c>` correctly detects a BOM when searching
for the shebang. Fix by Chris Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-03-29-16-20-00
.. gh-issue: 131852
.. nonce: afuefb
.. section: Tools/Demos

:program:`msgfmt` no longer adds the ``POT-Creation-Date`` to generated
``.mo`` files for consistency with GNU ``msgfmt``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-24-21-36-23
.. gh-issue: 85012
.. nonce: 9K1U0E
.. section: Tools/Demos

Correctly reset ``msgctxt`` when compiling messages in :program:`msgfmt`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-18-58-03
.. gh-issue: 131050
.. nonce: FMBAPN
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl.test_dh_params`` is skipped if the underlying TLS library does
not support finite-field ephemeral Diffie-Hellman.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-15-28-08
.. gh-issue: 119727
.. nonce: dVkaZM
.. section: Tests

Add ``--single-process`` command line option to Python test runner
(regrtest). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-04-11-08
.. gh-issue: 131809
.. nonce: 4MBDuy
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.1

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-23-28-39
.. gh-issue: 131261
.. nonce: 0aB6nM
.. section: Security

Upgrade to libexpat 2.7.0

..

.. date: 2024-11-28-20-29-21
.. gh-issue: 127371
.. nonce: PeEhUd
.. section: Security

Avoid unbounded buffering for
:meth:`!tempfile.SpooledTemporaryFile.writelines`. Previously, disk
spillover was only checked after the lines iterator had been exhausted. This
is now done after each line is written.

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-12-27-34
.. gh-issue: 121284
.. nonce: 8rwPxe
.. section: Security

Fix bug in the folding of rfc2047 encoded-words when flattening an email
message using a modern email policy. Previously when an encoded-word was too
long for a line, it would be decoded, split across lines, and re-encoded.
But commas and other special characters in the original text could be left
unencoded and unquoted. This could theoretically be used to spoof header
lines using a carefully constructed encoded-word if the resulting rendered
email was transmitted or re-parsed.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-07-59-32
.. gh-issue: 116608
.. nonce: -2nlIp
.. section: Library

undeprecate functional API for ``importlib.resources``

..

.. date: 2025-04-04-16-22-03
.. gh-issue: 132075
.. nonce: qMM5np
.. section: Library

Fix possible use of :mod:`socket` address structures with uninitialized
members. Now all structure members are initialized with zeroes by default.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-11-31-15
.. gh-issue: 132002
.. nonce: TMsYvE
.. section: Library

Fix crash when deallocating :class:`contextvars.ContextVar` with weird
unahashable string names.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-11-26-31
.. gh-issue: 131668
.. nonce: tcS4xS
.. section: Library

:mod:`socket`: Fix code parsing AF_BLUETOOTH socket addresses.

..

.. date: 2025-03-20-08-32-49
.. gh-issue: 131492
.. nonce: saC2cA
.. section: Library

Fix a resource leak when constructing a :class:`gzip.GzipFile` with a
filename fails, for example when passing an invalid ``compresslevel``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-18-50-39
.. gh-issue: 131325
.. nonce: wlasMF
.. section: Library

Fix sendfile fallback implementation to drain data after writing to
transport in :mod:`asyncio`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-15-45-36
.. gh-issue: 129843
.. nonce: NPdpXL
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect argument passing in :func:`warnings.warn_explicit`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-09-28-13
.. gh-issue: 131204
.. nonce: wogNEX
.. section: Library

Use monospace font from System Font Stack for cross-platform support in
:class:`difflib.HtmlDiff`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-12-26-56
.. gh-issue: 131045
.. nonce: s1TssJ
.. section: Library

Fix issue with ``__contains__``, values, and pseudo-members for
:class:`enum.Flag`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-07-19-24-27
.. gh-issue: 130959
.. nonce: xO8vVS
.. section: Library

Fix pure-Python implementation of :func:`datetime.time.fromisoformat` to
reject times with spaces in fractional part (for example, ``12:34:56.400
+02:00``), matching the C implementation. Patch by Michał Gorny.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-02-19-28
.. gh-issue: 130637
.. nonce: swet54w4rs
.. section: Library

Add validation for numeric response data in poplib.POP3.stat() method

..

.. date: 2025-02-25-03-53-00
.. gh-issue: 130461
.. nonce: asr2dg
.. section: Library

Remove ``.. index::`` directives from the :mod:`uuid` module documentation.
These directives previously created entries in the general index for
:func:`~uuid.getnode` as well as the :func:`~uuid.uuid1`,
:func:`~uuid.uuid3`, :func:`~uuid.uuid4`, and :func:`~uuid.uuid5`
constructor functions.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-10-32-05
.. gh-issue: 130285
.. nonce: C0fkh7
.. section: Library

Fix corner case for :func:`random.sample` allowing the *counts* parameter to
specify an empty population. So now, ``sample([], 0, counts=[])`` and
``sample('abc', k=0, counts=[0, 0, 0])`` both give the same result as
``sample([], 0)``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-19-19-29-19
.. gh-issue: 130250
.. nonce: T00tql
.. section: Library

Fix regression in ``traceback.print_last()``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-10-12-27
.. gh-issue: 118761
.. nonce: TNw5ZC
.. section: Library

Reverts a change in the previous release attempting to make some stdlib
imports used within the :mod:`subprocess` module lazy as this was causing
errors during ``__del__`` finalizers calling methods such as ``terminate``,
or ``kill``, or ``send_signal``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-08-56-48
.. gh-issue: 130164
.. nonce: vvoaU2
.. section: Library

Fixed failure to raise :exc:`TypeError` in :meth:`inspect.Signature.bind`
for positional-only arguments provided by keyword when a variadic keyword
argument (e.g. ``**kwargs``) is present.

..

.. date: 2025-02-15-12-36-49
.. gh-issue: 130151
.. nonce: 3IFumF
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in :func:`!_hashlib.hmac_new` and
:func:`!_hashlib.hmac_digest`. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-02-12-12-38-24
.. gh-issue: 129726
.. nonce: jB0sxu
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`gzip.GzipFile` raising an unraisable exception during garbage
collection when referring to a temporary object by breaking the reference
loop with :mod:`weakref`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-09-17-47-01
.. gh-issue: 129583
.. nonce: -130Ys
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 25.0.1

..

.. date: 2025-02-08-15-13-43
.. gh-issue: 97850
.. nonce: jQ0CvW
.. section: Library

Update the deprecation warning of :meth:`importlib.abc.Loader.load_module`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-03-01-43-16
.. gh-issue: 129603
.. nonce: xge9Tx
.. section: Library

Fix bugs where :class:`sqlite3.Row` objects could segfault if their
inherited :attr:`~sqlite3.Cursor.description` was set to ``None``. Patch by
Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2025-01-24-12-30-38
.. gh-issue: 117779
.. nonce: gADGXI
.. section: Library

Fix reading duplicated entries in :mod:`zipfile` by name. Reading duplicated
entries (except the last one) by ``ZipInfo`` now emits a warning instead of
raising an exception.

..

.. date: 2025-01-22-13-29-06
.. gh-issue: 128772
.. nonce: 6YrxYM
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`pydoc` for methods with the ``__module__`` attribute equal to
``None``.

..

.. date: 2025-01-20-20-59-26
.. gh-issue: 92897
.. nonce: G0xH8o
.. section: Library

Scheduled the deprecation of the ``check_home`` argument of
:func:`sysconfig.is_python_build` to Python 3.15.

..

.. date: 2025-01-15-12-04-30
.. gh-issue: 128703
.. nonce: 6WPf38
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`mimetypes.guess_type` to use default mapping for empty
``Content-Type`` in registry.

..

.. date: 2024-12-15-15-07-22
.. gh-issue: 126037
.. nonce: OyA7JP
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.find
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.find>`, :meth:`Element.findtext
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findtext>` and :meth:`Element.findall
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findall>` when the tag to find implements an
:meth:`~object.__eq__` method mutating the element being queried. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-12-07-20-33-43
.. gh-issue: 127712
.. nonce: Uzsij4
.. section: Library

Fix handling of the ``secure`` argument of
:class:`logging.handlers.SMTPHandler`.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-12-59-45
.. gh-issue: 126033
.. nonce: sM3uCn
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.remove
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.remove>` when the element is concurrently
mutated. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-26-16-59-02
.. gh-issue: 125553
.. nonce: 4pDLzt
.. section: Library

Fix round-trip invariance for backslash continuations in
:func:`tokenize.untokenize`.

..

.. date: 2024-05-05-16-08-03
.. gh-issue: 101137
.. nonce: 71ECXu
.. section: Library

Mime type ``text/x-rst`` is now supported by :mod:`mimetypes`.

..

.. date: 2024-01-07-23-31-44
.. gh-issue: 113238
.. nonce: wFWBfW
.. section: Library

Add ``Anchor`` to ``importlib.resources`` (in order for the code to comply
with the documentation)

..

.. date: 2023-12-18-20-10-50
.. gh-issue: 89039
.. nonce: gqFdtU
.. section: Library

When replace() method is called on a subclass of datetime, date or time,
properly call derived constructor. Previously, only the base class's
constructor was called.

Also, make sure to pass non-zero fold values when creating subclasses in
various methods. Previously, fold was silently ignored.

..

.. date: 2025-02-08-23-42-24
.. gh-issue: 129873
.. nonce: -gofkd
.. section: IDLE

Simplify displaying the IDLE doc by only copying the text section of
idle.html to idlelib/help.html. Patch by Stan Ulbrych.

..

.. date: 2025-03-18-15-15-16
.. gh-issue: 131417
.. nonce: lQg5aH
.. section: Documentation

Mention :class:`asyncio.Future` and :class:`asyncio.Task` in generic classes
list.

..

.. date: 2025-02-22-02-24-39
.. gh-issue: 125722
.. nonce: zDIUFV
.. section: Documentation

Require Sphinx 8.2.0 or later to build the Python documentation. Patch by
Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-08-44-31
.. gh-issue: 129712
.. nonce: 4AcfWQ
.. section: Documentation

The wheel tags supported by each macOS universal SDK option are now
documented.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-14-57-00
.. gh-issue: 46236
.. nonce: 2HuS4S
.. section: Documentation

C API: Document :c:func:`PyUnicode_RSplit`, :c:func:`PyUnicode_Partition`
and :c:func:`PyUnicode_RPartition`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-24-19-38-53
.. gh-issue: 131670
.. nonce: IffOZj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`anext` failing on sync :meth:`~object.__anext__` raising an
exception.

..

.. date: 2025-03-04-12-52-21
.. gh-issue: 130809
.. nonce: fSXq60
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed an issue where ``_PyFrame_LocalsToFast`` tries to write module level
values to hidden fasts.

..

.. date: 2025-03-03-20-02-45
.. gh-issue: 130775
.. nonce: fEM6T-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not crash on negative ``column`` and ``end_column`` in :mod:`ast`
locations.

..

.. date: 2025-02-27-15-07-06
.. gh-issue: 130618
.. nonce: JTcsRB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that was causing ``UnicodeDecodeError`` or ``SystemError`` to be
raised when using f-strings with ``lambda`` expressions with non-ASCII
characters. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2025-02-24-14-25-36
.. gh-issue: 130163
.. nonce: rGpc9v
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes related to concurrent change and use of the :mod:`sys`
module attributes.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-14-47-46
.. gh-issue: 88887
.. nonce: V3U0CV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixing multiprocessing Resource Tracker process leaking, usually observed
when running Python as PID 1.

..

.. date: 2025-02-13-00-28-43
.. gh-issue: 116042
.. nonce: 861juq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix location for SyntaxErrors of invalid escapes in the tokenizer. Patch by
Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2025-01-11-20-11-28
.. gh-issue: 128632
.. nonce: ryhnKs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow ``__classdict__`` as the name of a type parameter. Using this name
would previously crash the interpreter in some circumstances.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-23-30-35
.. gh-issue: 125331
.. nonce: quKQ7V
.. section: Core and Builtins

``from __future__ import barry_as_FLUFL`` now works in more contexts,
including when it is used in files, with the ``-c`` flag, and in the REPL
when there are multiple statements on the same line. Previously, it worked
only on subsequent lines in the REPL, and when the appropriate flags were
passed directly to :func:`compile`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-15-05-27
.. gh-issue: 107526
.. nonce: PB32z-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert converting ``vars``, ``dir``, ``next``, ``getattr``, and ``iter`` to
argument clinic.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-04-47-18
.. gh-issue: 107674
.. nonce: 0sYhR2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed performance regression in ``sys.settrace``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-26-06-56-40
.. gh-issue: 131740
.. nonce: 9PdxxQ
.. section: C API

Update PyUnstable_GC_VisitObjects to traverse perm gen.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-19-22-41
.. gh-issue: 131865
.. nonce: PIJy7X
.. section: Build

The DTrace build now properly passes the ``CC`` and ``CFLAGS`` variables to
the ``dtrace`` command when utilizing SystemTap on Linux.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-18-27-42
.. gh-issue: 130740
.. nonce: nDFSHR
.. section: Build

Ensure that ``Python.h`` is included before ``stdbool.h`` unless
``pyconfig.h`` is included before or in some platform-specific contexts.

..

.. date: 2025-02-07-21-20-21
.. gh-issue: 129838
.. nonce: fkuiEc
.. section: Build

Don't redefine ``_Py_NO_SANITIZE_UNDEFINED`` when compiling with a recent
GCC version and undefined sanitizer enabled.

..

.. date: 2025-02-04-12-30-43
.. gh-issue: 129660
.. nonce: SitXa7
.. section: Build

Drop ``test_embed`` from PGO training, whose contribution in recent versions
is considered to be ignorable.
