.. date: 2023-09-18-15-35-08
.. gh-issue: 109496
.. nonce: Kleoz3
.. release date: 2023-09-18
.. section: Core and Builtins

On a Python built in debug mode, :c:func:`Py_DECREF()` now calls
``_Py_NegativeRefcount()`` if the object is a dangling pointer to
deallocated memory: memory filled with ``0xDD`` "dead byte" by the debug
hook on memory allocators. The fix is to check the reference count *before*
checking for ``_Py_IsImmortal()``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-21-04-04
.. gh-issue: 109371
.. nonce: HPEJr8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deopted instructions correctly for tool initialization and modified the
incorrect assertion in instrumentation, when a previous tool already sets
INSTRUCTION events

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-19-16-51
.. gh-issue: 105658
.. nonce: z2nR2u
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where the line trace of an except block ending with a conditional
includes an excess event with the line of the conditional expression.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-08-42-45
.. gh-issue: 109219
.. nonce: UiN8sc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix compiling type param scopes that use a name which is also free in an
inner scope.

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-15-45-49
.. gh-issue: 109341
.. nonce: 4V5bkm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when compiling an invalid AST involving a :class:`ast.TypeAlias`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-15-51-55
.. gh-issue: 109195
.. nonce: iwxmuo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source location for the ``LOAD_*`` instruction preceding a
``LOAD_SUPER_ATTR`` to load the ``super`` global (or shadowing variable) so
that it encompasses only the name ``super`` and not the following
parentheses.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-12-49-46
.. gh-issue: 109118
.. nonce: gx0X4h
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow nested scopes (lambdas, generator expressions, and comprehensions)
within PEP 695 annotation scopes that are nested within classes.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-01-50-41
.. gh-issue: 109114
.. nonce: adqgtb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Relax the detection of the error message for invalid lambdas inside
f-strings to not search for arbitrary replacement fields to avoid false
positives. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-18-24-42
.. gh-issue: 109118
.. nonce: yPXRAe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix interpreter crash when a NameError is raised inside the type parameters
of a generic class.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-22-50-25
.. gh-issue: 108976
.. nonce: MUKaIJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash that occurs after de-instrumenting a code object in a monitoring
callback.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-13-28-42
.. gh-issue: 108732
.. nonce: I6DkEQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make iteration variables of module- and class-scoped comprehensions visible
to pdb and other tools that use ``frame.f_locals`` again.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-20-52-17
.. gh-issue: 108959
.. nonce: 6z45Sy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix caret placement for error locations for subscript and binary operations
that involve non-semantic parentheses and spaces. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-19-33-41
.. gh-issue: 108682
.. nonce: 35Xnc5
.. section: Library

Enum: require ``names=()`` or ``type=...`` to create an empty enum using the
functional syntax.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-06-17-23
.. gh-issue: 108843
.. nonce: WJMhsS
.. section: Library

Fix an issue in :func:`ast.unparse` when unparsing f-strings containing many
quote types.

..

.. date: 2023-03-19-09-39-31
.. gh-issue: 102823
.. nonce: OzsOz0
.. section: Documentation

Document the return type of ``x // y`` when ``x`` and ``y`` have type
:class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-14-22-58-47
.. gh-issue: 109396
.. nonce: J1a4jR
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_socket.test_hmac_sha1()`` in FIPS mode. Use a longer key: FIPS
mode requires at least of at least 112 bits. The previous key was only 32
bits. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-05-58-09
.. gh-issue: 104736
.. nonce: lA25Fu
.. section: Tests

Fix test_gdb on Python built with LLVM clang 16 on Linux ppc64le (ex: Fedora
38). Search patterns in gdb "bt" command output to detect when gdb fails to
retrieve the traceback. For example, skip a test if ``Backtrace stopped:
frame did not save the PC`` is found. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-22-32-20
.. gh-issue: 109237
.. nonce: SvgKwD
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_site.test_underpth_basic()`` when the working directory contains
at least one non-ASCII character: encode the ``._pth`` file to UTF-8 and
enable the UTF-8 Mode to use UTF-8 for the child process stdout. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-19-59-57
.. gh-issue: 109230
.. nonce: SRNLFQ
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_pyexpat.test_exception()``: it can now be run from a directory
different than Python source code directory. Before, the test failed in this
case.  Skip the test if Modules/pyexpat.c source is not available. Skip also
the test on Python implementations other than CPython. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-18-27-53
.. gh-issue: 109015
.. nonce: 1dS1AQ
.. section: Tests

Fix test_asyncio, test_imaplib and test_socket tests on FreeBSD if the TCP
blackhole is enabled (``sysctl net.inet.tcp.blackhole``). Skip the few tests
which failed with ``ETIMEDOUT`` which such non standard configuration.
Currently, the `FreeBSD GCP image enables TCP and UDP blackhole
<https://reviews.freebsd.org/D41751>`_ (``sysctl net.inet.tcp.blackhole=2``
and ``sysctl net.inet.udp.blackhole=1``).  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-15-36-51
.. gh-issue: 91960
.. nonce: P3nD5v
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_gdb`` if gdb is unable to retrieve Python frame objects: if a
frame is ``<optimized out>``. When Python is built with "clang -Og", gdb can
fail to retrive the *frame* parameter of ``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault()``. In
this case, tests like ``py_bt()`` are likely to fail. Without getting access
to Python frames, ``python-gdb.py`` is mostly clueless on retrieving the
Python traceback. Moreover, ``test_gdb`` is no longer skipped on macOS if
Python is built with Clang. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-23-00-09
.. gh-issue: 108962
.. nonce: R4NwuU
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_tempfile.test_flags()`` if ``chflags()`` fails with "OSError:
[Errno 45] Operation not supported" (ex: on FreeBSD 13). Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-21-41-10
.. gh-issue: 108851
.. nonce: xFTYOE
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_tomllib`` recursion tests for WASI buildbots: reduce the
recursion limit and compute the maximum nested array/dict depending on the
current available recursion limit. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-21-18-35
.. gh-issue: 108851
.. nonce: CCuHyI
.. section: Tests

Add ``get_recursion_available()`` and ``get_recursion_depth()`` functions to
the :mod:`test.support` module. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-20-15-49
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: Osvmhf
.. section: Tests

Add ``--fail-rerun option`` option to regrtest: if a test failed when then
passed when rerun in verbose mode, exit the process with exit code 2
(error), instead of exit code 0 (success). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-06-17-12
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: fjV-CJ
.. section: Tests

Rename regrtest ``--verbose2`` option (``-w``) to ``--rerun``. Keep
``--verbose2`` as a deprecated alias. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-02-01-55
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: iAwXzj
.. section: Tests

When regrtest reruns failed tests in verbose mode (``./python -m test
--rerun``), tests are now rerun in fresh worker processes rather than being
executed in the main process. If a test does crash or is killed by a
timeout, the main process can detect and handle the killed worker process.
Tests are rerun in parallel if the ``-jN`` option is used to run tests in
parallel. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-04-05-06-45-20
.. gh-issue: 103186
.. nonce: 640Eg-
.. section: Tests

Suppress and assert expected RuntimeWarnings in test_sys_settrace.py

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-01-39-26
.. gh-issue: 108740
.. nonce: JHExAQ
.. section: Build

Fix a race condition in ``make regen-all``. The ``deepfreeze.c`` source and
files generated by Argument Clinic are now generated or updated before
generating "global objects". Previously, some identifiers may miss depending
on the order in which these files were generated. Patch by Victor Stinner.
