.. date: 2024-05-01-20-57-09
.. gh-issue: 118486
.. nonce: K44KJG
.. release date: 2024-06-06
.. section: Security

:func:`os.mkdir` on Windows now accepts *mode* of ``0o700`` to restrict the
new directory to the current user. This fixes :cve:`2024-4030` affecting
:func:`tempfile.mkdtemp` in scenarios where the base temporary directory is
more permissive than the default.

..

.. date: 2024-03-27-13-50-02
.. gh-issue: 116741
.. nonce: ZoGryG
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.6.2

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-21-25-28
.. gh-issue: 117233
.. nonce: E4CyI_
.. section: Security

Detect BLAKE2, SHA3, Shake, & truncated SHA512 support in the OpenSSL-ish
libcrypto library at build time.  This allows :mod:`hashlib` to be used with
libraries that do not to support every algorithm that upstream OpenSSL does.

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-23-01-00
.. gh-issue: 119821
.. nonce: jPGfvt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix execution of :ref:`annotation scopes <annotation-scopes>` within classes
when ``globals`` is set to a non-dict. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-05-27-15-22-41
.. gh-issue: 118263
.. nonce: QfcDja
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed up :func:`os.path.normpath` with a direct C call.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-06-34-45
.. gh-issue: 119311
.. nonce: 2DBwKR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where names are unexpectedly mangled in the bases of generic
classes.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-06-34-14
.. gh-issue: 119395
.. nonce: z-Hsqb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where names appearing after a generic class are mangled as if they
are in the generic class.

..

.. date: 2024-05-22-13-51-40
.. gh-issue: 118507
.. nonce: xkIQ3v
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`os.path.isfile` on Windows for pipes.

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-11-27-14
.. gh-issue: 119213
.. nonce: nxjxrt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Non-builtin modules built with argument clinic were crashing if used in a
subinterpreter before the main interpreter.  The objects that were causing
the problem by leaking between interpreters carelessly have been fixed.

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-09-46-51
.. gh-issue: 119011
.. nonce: WOe3bu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes ``type.__type_params__`` to return an empty tuple instead of a
descriptor.

..

.. date: 2024-05-13-16-00-05
.. gh-issue: 118997
.. nonce: GWqWdt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix _Py_ClearImmortal() assertion: use _Py_IsImmortal() to tolerate
reference count lower than _Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT. Fix the assertion for the
stable ABI, when a C extension is built with Python 3.11 or lower. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-05-02-21-19-35
.. gh-issue: 118513
.. nonce: qHODjb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect :exc:`UnboundLocalError` when two comprehensions in the same
function both reference the same name, and in one comprehension the name is
bound while in the other it's an implicit global.

..

.. date: 2024-05-02-15-57-07
.. gh-issue: 118164
.. nonce: AF6kwI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Break a loop between the Python implementation of the :mod:`decimal` module
and the Python code for integer to string conversion. Also optimize integer
to string conversion for values in the range from 9_000 to 135_000 decimal
digits.

..

.. date: 2024-04-30-23-06-10
.. gh-issue: 118272
.. nonce: 5ptjk_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where ``generator.close`` does not free the generator frame's
locals.

..

.. date: 2024-04-27-16-23-29
.. gh-issue: 116767
.. nonce: z9UFpr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in compiler on 'async with' that has many context managers.

..

.. date: 2024-04-15-13-53-59
.. gh-issue: 117894
.. nonce: 8LpZ6m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent ``agen.aclose()`` objects being re-used after ``.throw()``.

..

.. date: 2024-04-15-07-37-09
.. gh-issue: 117881
.. nonce: 07H0wI
.. section: Core and Builtins

prevent concurrent access to an async generator via athrow().throw() or
asend().throw()

..

.. date: 2024-04-13-18-59-25
.. gh-issue: 115874
.. nonce: c3xG-E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a possible segfault during garbage collection of
``_asyncio.FutureIter`` objects

..

.. date: 2024-06-04-12-23-01
.. gh-issue: 119819
.. nonce: WKKrYh
.. section: Library

Fix regression to allow logging configuration with multiprocessing queue
types.

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-21-37-05
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: D6S9ig
.. section: Library

Fix issue with :func:`shutil.rmtree` where a :exc:`RecursionError` is raised
on deep directory trees.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-20-42-17
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: 5lPTTW
.. section: Library

Partially fix issue with :func:`shutil.rmtree` where a :exc:`RecursionError`
is raised on deep directory trees. A recursion error is no longer raised
when :data:`!rmtree.avoids_symlink_attacks` is false.

..

.. date: 2024-05-28-12-15-03
.. gh-issue: 119118
.. nonce: FMKz1F
.. section: Library

Fix performance regression in the :mod:`tokenize` module by caching the
``line`` token attribute and calculating the column offset more efficiently.

..

.. date: 2024-05-28-00-56-59
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: _bxoL3
.. section: Library

Fix issue with :func:`os.fwalk` where a :exc:`RecursionError` was raised on
deep directory trees by adjusting the implementation to be iterative instead
of recursive.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-21-54-55
.. gh-issue: 113892
.. nonce: JKDFqq
.. section: Library

Now, the method ``sock_connect`` of :class:`asyncio.ProactorEventLoop`
raises a :exc:`ValueError` if given socket is not in non-blocking mode, as
well as in other loop implementations.

..

.. date: 2024-05-19-18-49-04
.. gh-issue: 119174
.. nonce: 5GTv7d
.. section: Library

Fix high DPI causes turtledemo(turtle-graphics examples) windows blurry
Patch by Wulian233 and Terry Jan Reedy

..

.. date: 2024-05-16-17-31-46
.. gh-issue: 118643
.. nonce: hAWH4C
.. section: Library

Fix an AttributeError in the :mod:`email` module when re-fold a long address
list. Also fix more cases of incorrect encoding of the address separator in
the address list.

..

.. date: 2024-05-12-21-38-42
.. gh-issue: 58933
.. nonce: 0kgU2l
.. section: Library

Make :mod:`pdb` return to caller frame correctly when ``f_trace`` of the
caller frame is not set

..

.. date: 2024-05-09-21-36-11
.. gh-issue: 118868
.. nonce: uckxxP
.. section: Library

Fixed issue where kwargs were no longer passed to the logging handler
QueueHandler

..

.. date: 2024-05-04-20-22-59
.. gh-issue: 118164
.. nonce: 9D02MQ
.. section: Library

The Python implementation of the ``decimal`` module could appear to hang in
relatively small power cases (like ``2**117``) if context precision was set
to a very high value. A different method to check for exactly representable
results is used now that doesn't rely on computing ``10**precision`` (which
could be effectively too large to compute).

..

.. date: 2024-04-29-22-11-54
.. gh-issue: 118404
.. nonce: GYfMaD
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`inspect.signature` for non-comparable callables.

..

.. date: 2024-04-26-12-42-29
.. gh-issue: 118314
.. nonce: Z7reGc
.. section: Library

Fix an edge case in :func:`binascii.a2b_base64` strict mode, where excessive
padding is not detected when no padding is necessary.

..

.. date: 2024-04-25-12-02-06
.. gh-issue: 118042
.. nonce: 2EcdHf
.. section: Library

Fix an unraisable exception in :meth:`!telnetlib.Telnet.__del__` when the
``__init__()`` method was not called.

..

.. date: 2024-04-24-12-29-33
.. gh-issue: 118221
.. nonce: 2k_bac
.. section: Library

Fix a bug where :func:`!sqlite3.iterdump` could fail if a custom :attr:`row
factory <sqlite3.Connection.row_factory>` was used. Patch by Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2024-04-24-12-20-48
.. gh-issue: 118013
.. nonce: TKn_kZ
.. section: Library

Fix regression introduced in gh-103193 that meant that calling
:func:`inspect.getattr_static` on an instance would cause a strong reference
to that instance's class to persist in an internal cache in the
:mod:`inspect` module. This caused unexpected memory consumption if the
class was dynamically created, the class held strong references to other
objects which took up a significant amount of memory, and the cache
contained the sole strong reference to the class. The fix for the regression
leads to a slowdown in :func:`!getattr_static`, but the function should
still be significantly faster than it was in Python 3.11. Patch by Alex
Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-04-22-21-54-12
.. gh-issue: 90848
.. nonce: 5jHEEc
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec` to configure parent mock with
keyword arguments.

..

.. date: 2024-04-22-20-42-29
.. gh-issue: 118168
.. nonce: Igni7h
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect argument substitution when :data:`typing.Unpack` is used with
the builtin :class:`tuple`. :data:`!typing.Unpack` now raises
:exc:`TypeError` when used with certain invalid types. Patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-04-19-14-59-53
.. gh-issue: 118033
.. nonce: amS4Gw
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`dataclasses.dataclass` not creating a ``__weakref__`` slot when
subclassing :class:`typing.Generic`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-17-23-38-06
.. gh-issue: 117535
.. nonce: 4Fgjlq
.. section: Library

Do not try to get the source line for made up file name "sys" in
:mod:`warnings`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-17-22-00-15
.. gh-issue: 114053
.. nonce: _JBV4D
.. section: Library

Fix erroneous :exc:`NameError` when calling :func:`typing.get_type_hints` on
a class that made use of :pep:`695` type parameters in a module that had
``from __future__ import annotations`` at the top of the file. Patch by Alex
Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-04-17-19-41-59
.. gh-issue: 117995
.. nonce: Vt76Rv
.. section: Library

Don't raise :exc:`DeprecationWarning` when a :term:`sequence` of parameters
is used to bind indexed, nameless placeholders. See also :gh:`100668`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-17-18-00-30
.. gh-issue: 80361
.. nonce: RstWg-
.. section: Library

Fix TypeError in :func:`email.message.Message.get_payload` when the charset
is :rfc:`2231` encoded.

..

.. date: 2024-04-16-18-34-11
.. gh-issue: 86650
.. nonce: Zeydyg
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError when parse some emails with invalid Message-ID (including
one-off addresses generated by Microsoft Outlook).

..

.. date: 2024-04-14-15-59-28
.. gh-issue: 117691
.. nonce: 1mtREE
.. section: Library

Improve the error messages emitted by :mod:`tarfile` deprecation warnings
relating to PEP 706. If a ``filter`` argument is not provided to
``extract()`` or ``extractall``, the deprecation warning now points to the
line in the user's code where the relevant function was called. Patch by
Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-04-12-17-37-11
.. gh-issue: 77102
.. nonce: Mk6X_E
.. section: Library

:mod:`site` module now parses ``.pth`` file with UTF-8 first, and
:term:`locale encoding` if ``UnicodeDecodeError`` happened. It supported
only locale encoding before.

..

.. date: 2024-04-09-23-22-21
.. gh-issue: 117692
.. nonce: EciInD
.. section: Library

Fixes a bug when :class:`doctest.DocTestFinder` was failing on wrapped
``builtin_function_or_method``.

..

.. date: 2024-04-05-15-51-01
.. gh-issue: 117566
.. nonce: 54nABf
.. section: Library

:meth:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_loopback` will now return ``True`` for
IPv4-mapped loopback addresses, i.e. addresses in the
``::ffff:127.0.0.0/104`` address space.

..

.. date: 2024-04-03-15-04-23
.. gh-issue: 117503
.. nonce: NMfwup
.. section: Library

Fix support of non-ASCII user names in bytes paths in
:func:`os.path.expanduser` on Posix.

..

.. date: 2024-03-29-15-14-51
.. gh-issue: 117313
.. nonce: ks_ONu
.. section: Library

Only treat ``'\n'``, ``'\r'`` and ``'\r\n'`` as line separators in
re-folding the :mod:`email` messages. Preserve control characters ``'\v'``,
``'\f'``, ``'\x1c'``, ``'\x1d'`` and ``'\x1e'`` and Unicode line separators
``'\x85'``, ``'\u2028'`` and ``'\u2029'`` as is.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-01-38-44
.. gh-issue: 113171
.. nonce: VFnObz
.. section: Library

Fixed various false positives and false negatives in

* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_private` (see these docs for details)
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_global`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_private`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_global`

Also in the corresponding :class:`ipaddress.IPv4Network` and
:class:`ipaddress.IPv6Network` attributes.

..

.. date: 2023-04-28-09-54-15
.. gh-issue: 103956
.. nonce: EyLDPS
.. section: Library

Fix lack of newline characters in :mod:`trace` module output when line
tracing is enabled but source code line for current frame is not available.

..

.. date: 2023-04-26-22-24-17
.. gh-issue: 92081
.. nonce: V8xMot
.. section: Library

Fix missing spaces in email headers when the spaces are mixed with encoded
8-bit characters.

..

.. date: 2023-04-24-05-34-23
.. gh-issue: 103194
.. nonce: GwBwWL
.. section: Library

Prepare Tkinter for C API changes in Tcl 8.7/9.0 to avoid
:class:`_tkinter.Tcl_Obj` being unexpectedly returned instead of
:class:`bool`, :class:`str`, :class:`bytearray`, or :class:`int`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-10-00-04-37
.. gh-issue: 87106
.. nonce: UyBnPQ
.. section: Library

Fixed handling in :meth:`inspect.Signature.bind` of keyword arguments having
the same name as positional-only arguments when a variadic keyword argument
(e.g. ``**kwargs``) is present.

..

.. bpo: 45767
.. date: 2022-03-10-16-47-57
.. nonce: ywmyo1
.. section: Library

Fix integer conversion in :func:`os.major`, :func:`os.minor`, and
:func:`os.makedev`. Support device numbers larger than ``2**63-1``. Support
non-existent device number (``NODEV``).

..

.. bpo: 40943
.. date: 2020-06-10-19-24-17
.. nonce: vjiiN_
.. section: Library

Fix several IndexError when parse emails with truncated Message-ID, address,
routes, etc, e.g. ``example@``.

..

.. bpo: 30988
.. date: 2019-08-29-20-26-08
.. nonce: b-_h5O
.. section: Library

Fix parsing of emails with invalid address headers having a leading or
trailing dot. Patch by tsufeki.

..

.. date: 2019-08-27-01-16-50
.. gh-issue: 67693
.. nonce: 4NIAiy
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`urllib.parse.urlunparse` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlunsplit` for
URIs with path starting with multiple slashes and no authority. Based on
patch by Ashwin Ramaswami.

..

.. bpo: 15010
.. date: 2019-08-12-19-08-06
.. nonce: 3bY2CF
.. section: Library

:meth:`unittest.TestLoader.discover` now saves the original value of
``unittest.TestLoader._top_level_dir`` and restores it at the end of the
call.

..

.. date: 2024-04-25-22-12-20
.. gh-issue: 117928
.. nonce: LKdTno
.. section: Documentation

The minimum Sphinx version required for the documentation is now 6.2.1.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-13-15-23
.. gh-issue: 91565
.. nonce: OznXwC
.. section: Documentation

Changes to documentation files and config outputs to reflect the new
location for reporting bugs - i.e. GitHub rather than bugs.python.org.

..

.. date: 2024-05-18-10-59-27
.. gh-issue: 119050
.. nonce: g4qiH7
.. section: Tests

regrtest test runner: Add XML support to the refleak checker (-R option).
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-11-06-12
.. gh-issue: 119690
.. nonce: 8q6e1p
.. section: Windows

Adds Unicode support and fixes audit events for ``_winapi.CreateNamedPipe``.

..

.. date: 2024-05-22-19-43-29
.. gh-issue: 119070
.. nonce: _enton
.. section: Windows

Fixes ``py.exe`` handling of shebangs like ``/usr/bin/env python3.12``,
which were previously interpreted as ``python3.exe`` instead of
``python3.12.exe``.

..

.. date: 2024-04-29-13-53-25
.. gh-issue: 118347
.. nonce: U5ZRm_
.. section: Windows

Fixes launcher updates not being installed.

..

.. date: 2024-04-15-21-23-34
.. gh-issue: 115009
.. nonce: uhisHP
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.45.3.

..

.. date: 2024-04-12-14-02-58
.. gh-issue: 90329
.. nonce: YpEeaO
.. section: Windows

Suppress the warning displayed on virtual environment creation when the
requested and created paths differ only by a short (8.3 style) name.
Warnings will continue to be shown if a junction or symlink in the path
caused the venv to be created in a different location than originally
requested.

..

.. date: 2024-04-15-21-19-39
.. gh-issue: 115009
.. nonce: IdxH9N
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.45.3.

..

.. date: 2024-02-29-20-52-23
.. gh-issue: 116145
.. nonce: ygafim
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to Tcl/Tk 8.6.14.

..

.. bpo: 34774
.. date: 2018-09-23-01-36-39
.. nonce: VeM-X-
.. section: IDLE

Use user-selected color theme for Help => IDLE Doc.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-21-05-59
.. gh-issue: 119585
.. nonce: Sn7JL3
.. section: C API

Fix crash when a thread state that was created by
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` calls a destructor that during
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Clear` that calls back into
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`. This might
occur when in the free-threaded build or when using thread-local variables
whose destructors call :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-08-09-44-29
.. gh-issue: 117534
.. nonce: 54ZE_n
.. section: C API

Improve validation logic in the C implementation of
:meth:`datetime.fromisoformat` to better handle invalid years. Patch by Vlad
Efanov.
