.. date: 2025-09-25-10-31-02
.. gh-issue: 139330
.. nonce: 5WWkY0
.. release date: 2025-10-09
.. section: Tools/Demos

SBOM generation tool didn't cross-check the version and checksum values
against the ``Modules/expat/refresh.sh`` script, leading to the values
becoming out-of-date during routine updates.

..

.. date: 2025-10-07-19-31-34
.. gh-issue: 139700
.. nonce: vNHU1O
.. section: Security

Check consistency of the zip64 end of central directory record. Support
records with "zip64 extensible data" if there are no bytes prepended to the
ZIP file.

..

.. date: 2025-09-29-00-01-28
.. gh-issue: 139400
.. nonce: X2T-jO
.. section: Security

:mod:`xml.parsers.expat`: Make sure that parent Expat parsers are only
garbage-collected once they are no longer referenced by subparsers created
by :meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.ExternalEntityParserCreate`. Patch by
Sebastian Pipping.

..

.. date: 2025-06-25-14-13-39
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: idjQ0B
.. section: Security

Fix parsing start and end tags in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according
to the HTML5 standard.

* Whitespaces no longer accepted between ``</`` and the tag name.
  E.g. ``</ script>`` does not end the script section.

* Vertical tabulation (``\v``) and non-ASCII whitespaces no longer recognized
  as whitespaces. The only whitespaces are ``\t\n\r\f`` and space.

* Null character (U+0000) no longer ends the tag name.

* Attributes and slashes after the tag name in end tags are now ignored,
  instead of terminating after the first ``>`` in quoted attribute value.
  E.g. ``</script/foo=">"/>``.

* Multiple slashes and whitespaces between the last attribute and closing ``>``
  are now ignored in both start and end tags. E.g. ``<a foo=bar/ //>``.

* Multiple ``=`` between attribute name and value are no longer collapsed.
  E.g. ``<a foo==bar>`` produces attribute "foo" with value "=bar".

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-13-34-55
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: NZlpWf
.. section: Security

Fix CDATA section parsing in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according to
the HTML5 standard: ``] ]>`` and ``]] >`` no longer end the CDATA section.
Add private method ``_set_support_cdata()`` which can be used to specify how
to parse ``<[CDATA[`` --- as a CDATA section in foreign content (SVG or
MathML) or as a bogus comment in the HTML namespace.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-13-28-08
.. gh-issue: 102555
.. nonce: nADrzJ
.. section: Security

Fix comment parsing in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according to the
HTML5 standard. ``--!>`` now ends the comment. ``-- >`` no longer ends the
comment. Support abnormally ended empty comments ``<-->`` and ``<--->``.

..

.. date: 2025-06-13-15-55-22
.. gh-issue: 135462
.. nonce: KBeJpc
.. section: Security

Fix quadratic complexity in processing specially crafted input in
:class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`. End-of-file errors are now handled
according to the HTML5 specs -- comments and declarations are automatically
closed, tags are ignored.

..

.. date: 2025-06-09-20-38-25
.. gh-issue: 118350
.. nonce: KgWCcP
.. section: Security

Fix support of escapable raw text mode (elements "textarea" and "title") in
:class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`.

..

.. date: 2023-02-13-21-41-34
.. gh-issue: 86155
.. nonce: ppIGSC
.. section: Security

:meth:`html.parser.HTMLParser.close` no longer loses data when the
``<script>`` tag is not closed. Patch by Waylan Limberg.

..

.. date: 2025-09-25-07-33-43
.. gh-issue: 139312
.. nonce: ygE8AC
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled libexpat to 2.7.3

..

.. date: 2025-09-16-19-05-29
.. gh-issue: 138998
.. nonce: URl0Y_
.. section: Library

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.2

..

.. date: 2025-07-23-00-35-29
.. gh-issue: 130577
.. nonce: c7EITy
.. section: Library

:mod:`tarfile` now validates archives to ensure member offsets are
non-negative.  (Contributed by Alexander Enrique Urieles Nieto in
:gh:`130577`.)

..

.. date: 2025-06-09-23-57-37
.. gh-issue: 130077
.. nonce: MHknDB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly raise custom syntax errors when incorrect syntax containing names
that are prefixes of soft keywords is encountered.  Patch by Pablo Galindo.
