.. date: 2024-08-01-10-55-15
.. gh-issue: 122573
.. nonce: 4-UCFY
.. release date: 2024-08-06
.. section: Windows

The Windows build of CPython now requires 3.10 or newer.

..

.. date: 2024-07-13-11-48-20
.. gh-issue: 59022
.. nonce: fYNbQ8
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :func:`pkgutil.extend_path`. Patch by Andreas Stocker.

..

.. date: 2024-07-13-11-04-44
.. gh-issue: 99242
.. nonce: aGxnwz
.. section: Tests

:func:`os.getloadavg` may throw :exc:`OSError` when running regression tests
under certain conditions (e.g. chroot). This error is now caught and
ignored, since reporting load average is optional.

..

.. date: 2024-07-04-15-10-29
.. gh-issue: 121084
.. nonce: qxcd5d
.. section: Tests

Fix test_typing random leaks. Clear typing ABC caches when running tests for
refleaks (``-R`` option): call ``_abc_caches_clear()`` on typing abstract
classes and their subclasses. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-07-03-14-41-00
.. gh-issue: 121160
.. nonce: LEtiTd
.. section: Tests

Add a test for :func:`readline.set_history_length`. Note that this test may
fail on readline libraries.

..

.. date: 2024-07-01-16-15-06
.. gh-issue: 121200
.. nonce: 4Pc-gc
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_expanduser_pwd2()`` of ``test_posixpath``.  Call ``getpwnam()``
to get ``pw_dir``, since it can be different than ``getpwall()`` ``pw_dir``.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-07-01-09-04-32
.. gh-issue: 121188
.. nonce: XbuTVa
.. section: Tests

When creating the JUnit XML file, regrtest now escapes characters which are
invalid in XML, such as the chr(27) control character used in ANSI escape
sequences. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-13-14-38
.. gh-issue: 121957
.. nonce: FYkcOt
.. section: Security

Fixed missing audit events around interactive use of Python, now also
properly firing for ``python -i``, as well as for ``python -m asyncio``. The
event in question is ``cpython.run_stdin``.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-13-11-28
.. gh-issue: 122133
.. nonce: 0mPeta
.. section: Security

Authenticate the socket connection for the ``socket.socketpair()`` fallback
on platforms where ``AF_UNIX`` is not available like Windows.

Patch by Gregory P. Smith <greg@krypto.org> and Seth Larson
<seth@python.org>. Reported by Ellie <el@horse64.org>

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-18-07-19
.. gh-issue: 122744
.. nonce: kCzNDI
.. section: Library

Bump the version of pip bundled in ensurepip to version 24.2.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-21-29-30
.. gh-issue: 122334
.. nonce: LeoE1x
.. section: Library

Fix crash when importing :mod:`ssl` after the main interpreter restarts.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-14-46-16
.. gh-issue: 87320
.. nonce: -Yk1wb
.. section: Library

In :class:`code.InteractiveInterpreter`, handle exceptions caused by calling
a non-default :func:`sys.excepthook`. Before, the exception bubbled up to
the caller, ending the REPL.

..

.. date: 2024-07-29-16-47-08
.. gh-issue: 122400
.. nonce: fM0YSv
.. section: Library

Handle :exc:`ValueError`\s raised by :func:`os.stat` in
:class:`filecmp.dircmp` and :func:`filecmp.cmpfiles`. Patch by Bénédikt
Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-29-10-24-48
.. gh-issue: 122311
.. nonce: xChV1b
.. section: Library

Fix some error messages in :mod:`pickle`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-27-16-10-41
.. gh-issue: 121650
.. nonce: nf6oc9
.. section: Library

:mod:`email` headers with embedded newlines are now quoted on output. The
:mod:`~email.generator` will now refuse to serialize (write) headers that
are unsafely folded or delimited; see
:attr:`~email.policy.Policy.verify_generated_headers`. (Contributed by Bas
Bloemsaat and Petr Viktorin in :gh:`121650`.)

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-21-21-13
.. gh-issue: 122332
.. nonce: fvw88r
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault with :meth:`asyncio.Task.get_coro` when using an eager task
factory.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-15-30-23
.. gh-issue: 122170
.. nonce: Z9gi3Y
.. section: Library

Handle :exc:`ValueError`\s raised by :func:`os.stat` in :mod:`linecache`.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-10-59-38
.. gh-issue: 121723
.. nonce: iJEf7e
.. section: Library

Make :func:`logging.config.dictConfig` accept any object implementing the
Queue public API. See the :ref:`queue configuration <configure-queue>`
section for details. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-09-14-44
.. gh-issue: 82951
.. nonce: -F5p5A
.. section: Library

Serializing objects with complex ``__qualname__`` (such as unbound methods
and nested classes) by name no longer involves serializing parent objects by
value in pickle protocols < 4.

..

.. date: 2024-07-14-11-18-28
.. gh-issue: 120930
.. nonce: Kuo4L0
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug introduced by gh-92081 that added an incorrect extra blank to
encoded words occurring in wrapped headers.

..

.. date: 2024-07-08-03-45-34
.. gh-issue: 121474
.. nonce: NsvrUN
.. section: Library

Fix missing sanity check for ``parties`` arg in :class:`threading.Barrier`
constructor. Patch by Clinton Christian (pygeek).

..

.. date: 2024-06-26-10-13-40
.. gh-issue: 121025
.. nonce: M-XXlV
.. section: Library

Improve the :meth:`~object.__repr__` of :class:`functools.partialmethod`.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-06-26-03-04-24
.. gh-issue: 121018
.. nonce: clVSc4
.. section: Library

Fixed issues where :meth:`!argparse.ArgumentParser.parse_args` did not honor
``exit_on_error=False``. Based on patch by Ben Hsing.

..

.. date: 2024-06-23-17-50-40
.. gh-issue: 119614
.. nonce: vwPGLB
.. section: Library

Fix truncation of strings with embedded null characters in some internal
operations in :mod:`tkinter`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-23-11-21-27
.. gh-issue: 120910
.. nonce: t0QXdB
.. section: Library

When reading installed files from an egg, use ``relative_to(walk_up=True)``
to honor files installed outside of the installation root.

..

.. date: 2024-06-22-22-23-56
.. gh-issue: 101830
.. nonce: 1BAoxH
.. section: Library

Accessing the :mod:`tkinter` object's string representation no longer
converts the underlying Tcl object to a string on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-06-21-14-32-56
.. gh-issue: 120811
.. nonce: eBmVTV
.. section: Library

Fix possible memory leak in :meth:`contextvars.Context.run`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-20-01-31-24
.. gh-issue: 120769
.. nonce: PfiMrc
.. section: Library

Make empty line in :mod:`pdb` repeats the last command even when the command
is from ``cmdqueue``.

..

.. date: 2024-06-19-15-06-58
.. gh-issue: 120732
.. nonce: OvYV9b
.. section: Library

Fix ``name`` passing to :class:`unittest.mock.Mock` object when using
:func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-14-20-05-25
.. gh-issue: 120495
.. nonce: OxgZKB
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect exception handling in Tab Nanny. Patch by Wulian233.

..

.. date: 2024-06-11-16-34-41
.. gh-issue: 120343
.. nonce: hdiXeU
.. section: Library

Fix column offset reporting for tokens that come after multiline f-strings
in the :mod:`tokenize` module.

..

.. date: 2024-06-10-14-00-40
.. gh-issue: 119600
.. nonce: jJMf4C
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`unittest.mock.patch` to not read attributes of the target when
``new_callable`` is set. Patch by Robert Collins.

..

.. date: 2024-06-09-19-53-11
.. gh-issue: 120289
.. nonce: s4HXR0
.. section: Library

Fixed the use-after-free issue in :mod:`cProfile` by disallowing
``disable()`` and ``clear()`` in external timers.

..

.. date: 2024-06-08-15-46-35
.. gh-issue: 114053
.. nonce: Ub2XgJ
.. section: Library

Fix edge-case bug where :func:`typing.get_type_hints` would produce
incorrect results if type parameters in a class scope were overridden by
assignments in a class scope and ``from __future__ import annotations``
semantics were enabled. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-06-08-15-15-29
.. gh-issue: 114053
.. nonce: WQLAFG
.. section: Library

Fix erroneous :exc:`NameError` when calling :func:`inspect.get_annotations`
with ``eval_str=True``` on a class that made use of :pep:`695` type
parameters in a module that had ``from __future__ import annotations`` at
the top of the file. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2024-06-08-14-36-40
.. gh-issue: 120268
.. nonce: MNpd1q
.. section: Library

Prohibit passing ``None`` to pure-Python :meth:`datetime.date.fromtimestamp`
to achieve consistency with C-extension implementation.

..

.. date: 2024-06-08-09-45-31
.. gh-issue: 120244
.. nonce: 8o9Dzr
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in :func:`re.sub` when the replacement string contains
backreferences.

..

.. date: 2024-06-07-13-21-11
.. gh-issue: 120211
.. nonce: Rws_gf
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tkinter.ttk` with Tcl/Tk 9.0.

..

.. date: 2024-06-07-11-23-31
.. gh-issue: 71587
.. nonce: IjFajE
.. section: Library

Fix crash in C version of :meth:`datetime.datetime.strptime` when called
again on the restarted interpreter.

..

.. date: 2024-06-07-10-10-32
.. gh-issue: 117983
.. nonce: NeMR9n
.. section: Library

Defer the ``threading`` import in ``importlib.util`` until lazy loading is
used.

..

.. date: 2024-06-06-12-07-57
.. gh-issue: 119698
.. nonce: rRrprk
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`symtable.Class.get_methods` and document its behaviour. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-16-30-28
.. gh-issue: 120121
.. nonce: 9dz8i7
.. section: Library

Add :exc:`concurrent.futures.InvalidStateError` to module's ``__all__``.

..

.. date: 2024-06-04-19-03-25
.. gh-issue: 112672
.. nonce: K2XfZH
.. section: Library

Support building :mod:`tkinter` with Tcl 9.0.

..

.. date: 2024-06-04-08-57-02
.. gh-issue: 65454
.. nonce: o9j4wF
.. section: Library

:func:`unittest.mock.Mock.attach_mock` no longer triggers a call to a
``PropertyMock`` being attached.

..

.. date: 2024-06-02-13-35-11
.. gh-issue: 81936
.. nonce: ETeW9x
.. section: Library

:meth:`!help` and :meth:`!showtopic` methods now respect a configured
*output* argument to :class:`!pydoc.Helper` and not use the pager in such
cases. Patch by Enrico Tröger.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-21-50-05
.. gh-issue: 119577
.. nonce: S3BlKJ
.. section: Library

The :exc:`DeprecationWarning` emitted when testing the truth value of an
:class:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element` now describes unconditionally
returning ``True`` in a future version rather than raising an exception in
Python 3.14.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-14-32-24
.. gh-issue: 119506
.. nonce: -nMNqq
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!io.TextIOWrapper.write` method breaks internal buffer when the
method is called again during flushing internal buffer.

..

.. date: 2024-05-20-13-48-37
.. gh-issue: 119189
.. nonce: dhJVs5
.. section: Library

When using the ``**`` operator or :func:`pow` with
:class:`~fractions.Fraction` as the base and an exponent that is not
rational, a float, or a complex, the fraction is no longer converted to a
float.

..

.. date: 2023-06-17-09-07-06
.. gh-issue: 105623
.. nonce: 5G06od
.. section: Library

Fix performance degradation in
:class:`logging.handlers.RotatingFileHandler`. Patch by Craig Robson.

..

.. bpo: 39324
.. date: 2020-01-14-09-46-51
.. nonce: qUcDrM
.. section: Library

Add mime type mapping for .md <-> text/markdown

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-18-02-55
.. gh-issue: 122482
.. nonce: TerE0g
.. section: IDLE

Change About IDLE to direct users to discuss.python.org instead of the now
unused idle-dev email and mailing list.

..

.. date: 2024-07-16-16-57-03
.. gh-issue: 78889
.. nonce: U7ghFD
.. section: IDLE

Stop Shell freezes by blocking user access to non-method sys.stdout.shell
attributes, which are all private.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-14-54-24
.. gh-issue: 120104
.. nonce: j_thj4
.. section: IDLE

Fix padding in config and search dialog windows in IDLE.

..

.. date: 2024-07-14-11-48-10
.. gh-issue: 121749
.. nonce: nxHoTk
.. section: Documentation

Fix documentation for :c:func:`PyModule_AddObjectRef`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-12-36-18
.. gh-issue: 120012
.. nonce: f14DbQ
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the behaviours of :meth:`multiprocessing.Queue.empty` and
:meth:`multiprocessing.SimpleQueue.empty` on closed queues. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-21-38-47
.. gh-issue: 122208
.. nonce: z8KHsY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Dictionary watchers now only deliver the PyDict_EVENT_ADDED event when the
insertion is in a known good state to succeed.

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-14-05-51
.. gh-issue: 122300
.. nonce: SVIF-l
.. section: Core and Builtins

Preserve AST nodes for f-string with single-element format specifiers. Patch
by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-07-21-01-23-54
.. gh-issue: 122029
.. nonce: gKv-e2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit ``c_call`` events in :func:`sys.setprofile` when a ``PyMethodObject``
pointing to a ``PyCFunction`` is called.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-15-28-05
.. gh-issue: 122026
.. nonce: sta2Ca
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that caused the tokenizer to not correctly identify mismatched
parentheses inside f-strings in some situations. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-07-13-12-27-31
.. gh-issue: 121657
.. nonce: wgOYLw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the :exc:`SyntaxError` message if the user tries to use
:keyword:`yield from <yield>` outside a function.

..

.. date: 2024-07-10-15-43-54
.. gh-issue: 117482
.. nonce: 5WYaXR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Unexpected slot wrappers are no longer created for builtin static types in
subinterpreters.

..

.. date: 2024-07-08-02-24-55
.. gh-issue: 121439
.. nonce: jDHod3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow tuples of length 20 in the freelist to be reused.

..

.. date: 2024-06-29-10-46-14
.. gh-issue: 121130
.. nonce: Rj66Xs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix f-strings with debug expressions in format specifiers. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-06-18-22-41-05
.. gh-issue: 120722
.. nonce: rS7tkE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly set the bytecode position on return instructions within lambdas.
Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-06-13-12-17-52
.. gh-issue: 120384
.. nonce: w1UBGl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an array out of bounds crash in ``list_ass_subscript``, which could be
invoked via some specificly tailored input: including concurrent
modification of a list object, where one thread assigns a slice and another
clears it.

..

.. date: 2024-06-12-18-23-15
.. gh-issue: 120380
.. nonce: edtqjq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix Python implementation of :class:`pickle.Pickler` for :class:`bytes` and
:class:`bytearray` objects when using protocol version 5. Patch by Bénédikt
Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-06-10-22-30-26
.. gh-issue: 93691
.. nonce: 68WOTS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source locations of instructions generated for the iterator of a for
statement.

..

.. date: 2024-06-10-15-07-16
.. gh-issue: 120198
.. nonce: WW_pjO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when multiple threads read and write to the same ``__class__``
of an object concurrently.

..

.. date: 2024-06-10-10-42-48
.. gh-issue: 120298
.. nonce: napREA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix use-after free in ``list_richcompare_impl`` which can be invoked via
some specificly tailored evil input.

..

.. date: 2024-06-09-19-13-38
.. gh-issue: 119666
.. nonce: S0G4rZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a compiler crash in the case where two comprehensions in class scope
both reference ``__class__``.

..

.. bpo: 24766
.. date: 2018-10-09-15-14-53
.. nonce: c_C1Wc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix handling of ``doc`` argument to subclasses of ``property``.

..

.. date: 2024-06-21-09-24-03
.. gh-issue: 120671
.. nonce: Z8sBQB
.. section: Build

Fix failing configure tests due to a missing space when appending to CFLAGS.

..

.. date: 2024-03-08-17-05-15
.. gh-issue: 115983
.. nonce: ZQqk0Q
.. section: Build

Skip building test modules that must be built as shared under WASI.
