.. date: 2023-06-13-20-52-24
.. gh-issue: 102988
.. nonce: Kei7Vf
.. release date: 2023-08-05
.. section: Security

Reverted the :mod:`email.utils` security improvement change released in
3.12beta4 that unintentionally caused :mod:`email.utils.getaddresses` to
fail to parse email addresses with a comma in the quoted name field. See
:gh:`106669`.

..

.. date: 2023-03-07-21-46-29
.. gh-issue: 102509
.. nonce: 5ouaH_
.. section: Security

Start initializing ``ob_digit`` during creation of :c:type:`PyLongObject`
objects. Patch by Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-05-20-16
.. gh-issue: 107263
.. nonce: q0IU2M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Increase C recursion limit for functions other than the main interpreter
from 800 to 1500. This should allow functions like ``list.__repr__`` and
``json.dumps`` to handle all the inputs that they could prior to 3.12

..

.. date: 2023-07-27-11-47-29
.. gh-issue: 104432
.. nonce: oGHF-z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential unaligned memory access on C APIs involving returned sequences
of ``char *`` pointers within the :mod:`grp` and :mod:`socket` modules. These
were revealed using a ``-fsaniziter=alignment`` build on ARM macOS. Patch by
Christopher Chavez.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-21-28-06
.. gh-issue: 106898
.. nonce: 8Wjuiv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add the exception as the third argument to ``PY_UNIND`` callbacks in
``sys.monitoring``. This makes the ``PY_UNWIND`` callback consistent with
the other exception hanlding callbacks.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-18-53-34
.. gh-issue: 106895
.. nonce: DdEwV8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a ``ValueError`` when a monitoring callback funtion returns
``DISABLE`` for events that cannot be disabled locally.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-12-18-10
.. gh-issue: 106897
.. nonce: EsGurc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a ``RERAISE`` event to ``sys.monitoring``, which occurs when an
exception is reraised, either explicitly by a plain ``raise`` statement, or
implicitly in an ``except`` or ``finally`` block.

..

.. date: 2023-07-24-11-11-41
.. gh-issue: 104621
.. nonce: vM8Y_l
.. section: Core and Builtins

Unsupported modules now always fail to be imported.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-14-37-48
.. gh-issue: 106917
.. nonce: 1jWp_m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix classmethod-style :func:`super` method calls (i.e., where the second
argument to :func:`super`, or the implied second argument drawn from
``self/cls`` in the case of zero-arg super, is a type) when the target of
the call is not a classmethod.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-15-15-57
.. gh-issue: 105699
.. nonce: DdqHFg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python no longer crashes due an infrequent race when initialzing
per-interpreter interned strings.  The crash would manifest when the
interpreter was finalized.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-12-21-37
.. gh-issue: 105699
.. nonce: 08ywGV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python no longer crashes due to an infrequent race in setting
``Py_FileSystemDefaultEncoding`` and ``Py_FileSystemDefaultEncodeErrors``
(both deprecated), when simultaneously initializing two isolated
subinterpreters.  Now they are only set during runtime initialization.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-16-13-51
.. gh-issue: 106092
.. nonce: bObgRM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segmentation fault caused by a use-after-free bug in ``frame_dealloc``
when the trashcan delays the deallocation of a ``PyFrameObject``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-15-59-07
.. gh-issue: 106719
.. nonce: jmVrsv
.. section: Core and Builtins

No longer suppress arbitrary errors in the ``__annotations__`` getter and
setter in the type and module types.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-14-55-45
.. gh-issue: 106723
.. nonce: KsMufQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Propagate ``frozen_modules`` to multiprocessing spawned process
interpreters.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-19-37-29
.. gh-issue: 105235
.. nonce: fgFGTi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent out-of-bounds memory access during ``mmap.find()`` calls.

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-12-52-19
.. gh-issue: 107077
.. nonce: -pzHD6
.. section: Library

Seems that in some conditions, OpenSSL will return ``SSL_ERROR_SYSCALL``
instead of ``SSL_ERROR_SSL`` when a certification verification has failed,
but the error parameters will still contain ``ERR_LIB_SSL`` and
``SSL_R_CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED``. We are now detecting this situation and
raising the appropiate ``ssl.SSLCertVerificationError``. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-11-31-11
.. gh-issue: 107576
.. nonce: pO_s9I
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`types.get_original_bases` to only return :attr:`!__orig_bases__`
if it is present on ``cls`` directly. Patch by James Hilton-Balfe.

..

.. date: 2023-07-24-01-21-16
.. gh-issue: 46376
.. nonce: w-xuDL
.. section: Library

Prevent memory leak and use-after-free when using pointers to pointers with
ctypes

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-12-26-23
.. gh-issue: 62519
.. nonce: w8-81X
.. section: Library

Make :func:`gettext.pgettext` search plural definitions when translation is
not found.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-51-33
.. gh-issue: 83006
.. nonce: 21zaCz
.. section: Library

Document behavior of :func:`shutil.disk_usage` for non-mounted filesystems
on Unix.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-13-09-28
.. gh-issue: 106186
.. nonce: EIsUNG
.. section: Library

Do not report ``MultipartInvariantViolationDefect`` defect when the
:class:`email.parser.Parser` class is used to parse emails with
``headersonly=True``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-12-53-53
.. gh-issue: 105002
.. nonce: gkfsW0
.. section: Library

Fix invalid result from :meth:`PurePath.relative_to` method when attempting
to walk a "``..``" segment in *other* with *walk_up* enabled. A
:exc:`ValueError` exception is now raised in this case.

..

.. date: 2023-07-17-21-45-15
.. gh-issue: 106831
.. nonce: RqVq9X
.. section: Library

Fix potential missing ``NULL`` check of ``d2i_SSL_SESSION`` result in
``_ssl.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-15-10-24-56
.. gh-issue: 106774
.. nonce: FJcqCj
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copy of pip to version 23.2.1.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-16-54-13
.. gh-issue: 106752
.. nonce: BT1Yxw
.. section: Library

Fixed several bugs in zipfile.Path, including: in ``Path.match``, Windows
separators are no longer honored (and never were meant to be); Fixed
``name``/``suffix``/``suffixes``/``stem`` operations when no filename is
present and the Path is not at the root of the zipfile; Reworked glob for
performance and more correct matching behavior.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-04-58-45
.. gh-issue: 106602
.. nonce: dGCcXe
.. section: Library

Add __copy__ and __deepcopy__ in :mod:`enum`

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-09-25-40
.. gh-issue: 106530
.. nonce: VgXrMx
.. section: Library

Revert a change to :func:`colorsys.rgb_to_hls` that caused division by zero
for certain almost-white inputs.  Patch by Terry Jan Reedy.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-07-25-30
.. gh-issue: 106403
.. nonce: GmefbV
.. section: Library

Instances of :class:`typing.TypeVar`, :class:`typing.ParamSpec`,
:class:`typing.ParamSpecArgs`, :class:`typing.ParamSpecKwargs`, and
:class:`typing.TypeVarTuple` once again support weak references, fixing a
regression introduced in Python 3.12.0 beta 1. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-03-46-20
.. gh-issue: 106350
.. nonce: LLcTEe
.. section: Library

Detect possible memory allocation failure in the libtommath function
:c:func:`mp_init` used by the ``_tkinter`` module.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-16-42-44
.. gh-issue: 106263
.. nonce: tk-t93
.. section: Library

Fix crash when calling ``repr`` with a manually constructed SignalDict
object. Patch by Charlie Zhao.

..

.. date: 2023-06-10-12-20-17
.. gh-issue: 105626
.. nonce: XyZein
.. section: Library

Change the default return value of
:meth:`http.client.HTTPConnection.get_proxy_response_headers` to be ``None``
and not ``{}``.

..

.. bpo: 18319
.. date: 2020-05-03-00-33-15
.. nonce: faPTlx
.. section: Library

Ensure ``gettext(msg)`` retrieve translations even if a plural form exists. In
other words: ``gettext(msg) == ngettext(msg, '', 1)``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-16-33-04
.. gh-issue: 107305
.. nonce: qB2LS4
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation for :c:type:`PyInterpreterConfig` and
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig`.  Also clarify some of the nearby docs
relative to per-interpreter GIL.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-14-13
.. gh-issue: 107008
.. nonce: 3JQ1Vt
.. section: Documentation

Document the :mod:`curses` module variables :const:`~curses.LINES` and
:const:`~curses.COLS`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-11-51-57
.. gh-issue: 106948
.. nonce: K_JQ7j
.. section: Documentation

Add a number of standard external names to ``nitpick_ignore``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-16-22-08-24
.. gh-issue: 54738
.. nonce: mJvCnj
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation on how to localize the :mod:`argparse` module.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-14-36-33
.. gh-issue: 107237
.. nonce: y1pY79
.. section: Tests

``test_logging``: Fix ``test_udp_reconnection()`` by increasing the timeout
from 100 ms to 5 minutes (LONG_TIMEOUT). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-13-49-40
.. gh-issue: 106714
.. nonce: btYI5S
.. section: Tests

test_capi: Fix test_no_FatalError_infinite_loop() to no longer write a
coredump, by using test.support.SuppressCrashReport. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-16-02-57-08
.. gh-issue: 104090
.. nonce: cKtK7g
.. section: Tests

Avoid creating a reference to the test object in
:meth:`~unittest.TestResult.collectedDurations`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-16-20-06
.. gh-issue: 106752
.. nonce: gd1i6D
.. section: Tests

Moved tests for ``zipfile.Path`` into ``Lib/test/test_zipfile/_path``. Made
``zipfile._path`` a package.

..

.. date: 2023-07-28-18-17-33
.. gh-issue: 106881
.. nonce: U3Ezdq
.. section: Build

Check for ``linux/limits.h`` before including it in ``Modules/posixmodule.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-00-38-51
.. gh-issue: 106962
.. nonce: VVYrWB
.. section: Build

Detect MPI compilers in :file:`configure`.

..

.. date: 2023-02-03-21-36-42
.. gh-issue: 101538
.. nonce: sF5F6S
.. section: Build

Add experimental wasi-threads support. Patch by Takashi Yamamoto.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-20-48-17
.. gh-issue: 99079
.. nonce: CIMftz
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.9

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-23-42-20
.. gh-issue: 99079
.. nonce: JAtoh1
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.9.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-23-16-05
.. gh-issue: 106970
.. nonce: NLRnml
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix bugs in the Argument Clinic ``destination <name> clear`` command; the
destination buffers would never be cleared, and the ``destination``
directive parser would simply continue to the fault handler after processing
the command. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-04-05-07-19-36
.. gh-issue: 103186
.. nonce: yEozgK
.. section: Tools/Demos

``freeze`` now fetches ``CONFIG_ARGS`` from the original CPython instance
the Makefile uses to call utility scripts. Patch by Ijtaba Hussain.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-13-41-09
.. gh-issue: 107226
.. nonce: N919zH
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyModule_AddObjectRef` is now only available in the limited API
version 3.10 or later.
