.. date: 2023-08-22-17-39-12
.. gh-issue: 108310
.. nonce: fVM3sg
.. release date: 2023-09-05
.. section: Security

Fixed an issue where instances of :class:`ssl.SSLSocket` were vulnerable to
a bypass of the TLS handshake and included protections (like certificate
verification) and treating sent unencrypted data as if it were
post-handshake TLS encrypted data.  Security issue reported as
:cve:`2023-40217` by Aapo Oksman. Patch by Gregory P. Smith.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-03-51-05
.. gh-issue: 107774
.. nonce: VPjaTR
.. section: Security

PEP 669 specifies that ``sys.monitoring.register_callback`` will generate an
audit event. Pre-releases of Python 3.12 did not generate the audit event.
This is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-15-41-47
.. gh-issue: 108520
.. nonce: u0ZGP_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :meth:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock.__setstate__` to properly
initialize :attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock._is_fork_ctx`. This
fixes a regression when passing a SemLock accross nested processes.

Rename :attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock.is_fork_ctx` to
:attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock._is_fork_ctx` to avoid exposing
it as public API.

..

.. date: 2023-08-29-17-53-12
.. gh-issue: 108654
.. nonce: jbkDVo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore locals shadowed by an inlined comprehension if the comprehension
raises an exception.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-04-33-18
.. gh-issue: 108487
.. nonce: aUFxqf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change an assert that would cause a spurious crash in a devious case that
should only trigger deoptimization.

..

.. date: 2023-08-25-14-51-06
.. gh-issue: 106176
.. nonce: D1EA2a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use a ``WeakValueDictionary`` to track the lists containing the modules each
thread is currently importing. This helps avoid a reference leak from
keeping the list around longer than necessary. Weakrefs are used as GC can't
interrupt the cleanup.

..

.. date: 2023-08-21-21-13-30
.. gh-issue: 107901
.. nonce: hszvdk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing line number on :opcode:`JUMP_BACKWARD` at the end of a for loop.

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-17-18-22
.. gh-issue: 108390
.. nonce: TkBccC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise an exception when setting a non-local event (``RAISE``,
``EXCEPTION_HANDLED``, etc.) in ``sys.monitoring.set_local_events``.

Fixes crash when tracing in recursive calls to Python classes.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-17-36-27
.. gh-issue: 91051
.. nonce: LfaeNW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix abort / segfault when using all eight type watcher slots, on platforms
where ``char`` is signed by default.

..

.. date: 2023-08-04-21-25-26
.. gh-issue: 107724
.. nonce: EbBXMr
.. section: Core and Builtins

In pre-release versions of 3.12, up to rc1, the sys.monitoring callback
function for the ``PY_THROW`` event was missing the third, exception
argument. That is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-08-02-12-24-51
.. gh-issue: 107080
.. nonce: PNolFU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Trace refs builds (``--with-trace-refs``) were crashing when used with
isolated subinterpreters.  The problematic global state has been isolated to
each interpreter.  Other fixing the crashes, this change does not affect
users.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-22-35-35
.. gh-issue: 77377
.. nonce: EHAbXx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that multiprocessing synchronization objects created in a fork
context are not sent to a different process created in a spawn context. This
changes a segfault into an actionable RuntimeError in the parent process.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-04-37-52
.. gh-issue: 108469
.. nonce: kusj40
.. section: Library

:func:`ast.unparse` now supports new :term:`f-string` syntax introduced in
Python 3.12. Note that the :term:`f-string` quotes are reselected for
simplicity under the new syntax. (Patch by Steven Sun)

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-20-10-28
.. gh-issue: 108682
.. nonce: c2gzLQ
.. section: Library

Enum: raise :exc:`TypeError` if ``super().__new__()`` is called from a
custom ``__new__``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-08-38-57
.. gh-issue: 108295
.. nonce: Pn0QRM
.. section: Library

Fix crashes related to use of weakrefs on :data:`typing.TypeVar`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-22-29-42
.. gh-issue: 64662
.. nonce: jHl_Bt
.. section: Library

Fix support for virtual tables in :meth:`sqlite3.Connection.iterdump`. Patch
by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-17-27-12
.. gh-issue: 108111
.. nonce: N7a4u_
.. section: Library

Fix a regression introduced in GH-101251 for 3.12, resulting in an incorrect
offset calculation in :meth:`gzip.GzipFile.seek`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-17-14-45-25
.. gh-issue: 105736
.. nonce: NJsH7r
.. section: Library

Harmonized the pure Python version of :class:`~collections.OrderedDict` with
the C version. Now, both versions set up their internal state in
``__new__``.  Formerly, the pure Python version did the set up in
``__init__``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-17-12-59-35
.. gh-issue: 108083
.. nonce: 9J7UcT
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in the constructor of :mod:`sqlite3.Connection` and
:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.close` where exceptions could be leaked. Patch by
Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-18-20-00
.. gh-issue: 107963
.. nonce: 20g5BG
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`multiprocessing.set_forkserver_preload` to check the given list
of modules names. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-23-11-11
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: 71HMym
.. section: Library

Fixes :func:`os.path.normpath` to handle embedded null characters without
truncating the path.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-11-18-13
.. gh-issue: 107913
.. nonce: 4ooY6i
.. section: Library

Fix possible losses of ``errno`` and ``winerror`` values in :exc:`OSError`
exceptions if they were cleared or modified by the cleanup code before
creating the exception object.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-17-36-22
.. gh-issue: 107845
.. nonce: dABiMJ
.. section: Library

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now takes the location of symlinks into account
when determining their target, so it will no longer reject some valid
tarballs with ``LinkOutsideDestinationError``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-13-49-37
.. gh-issue: 107805
.. nonce: ezem0k
.. section: Library

Fix signatures of module-level generated functions in :mod:`turtle`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-14-12-07
.. gh-issue: 107715
.. nonce: 238r2f
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`doctest.DocTestFinder.find` in presence of class names with
special characters. Patch by Gertjan van Zwieten.

..

.. date: 2023-08-06-15-29-00
.. gh-issue: 100814
.. nonce: h195gW
.. section: Library

Passing a callable object as an option value to a Tkinter image now raises
the expected TclError instead of an AttributeError.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-05-10-41
.. gh-issue: 106684
.. nonce: P9zRXb
.. section: Library

Close :class:`asyncio.StreamWriter` when it is not closed by application
leading to memory leaks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-07-31-07-36-24
.. gh-issue: 107396
.. nonce: 3_Kh6D
.. section: Library

tarfiles; Fixed use before assignment of self.exception for gzip
decompression

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-14-52-31
.. gh-issue: 106052
.. nonce: ak8nbs
.. section: Library

:mod:`re` module: fix the matching of possessive quantifiers in the case of
a subpattern containing backtracking.

..

.. date: 2023-03-14-01-19-57
.. gh-issue: 100061
.. nonce: CiXJYn
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that causes wrong matches for regular expressions with possessive
qualifier.

..

.. date: 2022-11-26-22-05-22
.. gh-issue: 99203
.. nonce: j0DUae
.. section: Library

Restore following CPython <= 3.10.5 behavior of :func:`shutil.make_archive`:
do not create an empty archive if ``root_dir`` is not a directory, and, in
that case, raise :class:`FileNotFoundError` or :class:`NotADirectoryError`
regardless of ``format`` choice. Beyond the brought-back behavior, the
function may now also raise these exceptions in ``dry_run`` mode.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-14-10-24
.. gh-issue: 105052
.. nonce: MGFwbm
.. section: Documentation

Update ``timeit`` doc to specify that time in seconds is just the default.

..

.. date: 2023-09-04-15-18-14
.. gh-issue: 89392
.. nonce: 8A4T5p
.. section: Tests

Removed support of ``test_main()`` function in tests. They now always use
normal unittest test runner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-06-10-36
.. gh-issue: 108388
.. nonce: YCVB0D
.. section: Tests

Convert test_concurrent_futures to a package of 7 sub-tests. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-04-23-35
.. gh-issue: 108388
.. nonce: mr0MeE
.. section: Tests

Split test_multiprocessing_fork, test_multiprocessing_forkserver and
test_multiprocessing_spawn into test packages. Each package is made of 4
sub-tests: processes, threads, manager and misc. It allows running more
tests in parallel and so reduce the total test duration. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-04-08-18
.. gh-issue: 105776
.. nonce: oE6wp_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_cppext when the C compiler command ``-std=c11`` option: remove
``-std=`` options from the compiler command. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-24-16-56-59
.. gh-issue: 107178
.. nonce: Gq1usE
.. section: Tests

Add the C API test for functions in the Mapping Protocol, the Sequence
Protocol and some functions in the Object Protocol.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-18-04-15
.. gh-issue: 63760
.. nonce: r8hJ6q
.. section: Build

Fix Solaris build: no longer redefine the ``gethostname()`` function.
Solaris defines the function since 2005. Patch by Victor Stinner, original
patch by Jakub Kulík.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-17-05-33
.. gh-issue: 107814
.. nonce: c0Oapq
.. section: Build

When calling ``find_python.bat`` with ``-q`` it did not properly silence the
output of nuget. That is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-10-08-47
.. gh-issue: 107565
.. nonce: CIMftz
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.10.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-00-36-57
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: q24ITw
.. section: Windows

Fixes :func:`~os.path.realpath` to behave consistently when passed a path
containing an embedded null character on Windows. In strict mode, it now
raises :exc:`OSError` instead of the unexpected :exc:`ValueError`, and in
non-strict mode will make the path absolute.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-13-01-26
.. gh-issue: 106844
.. nonce: mci4xO
.. section: Windows

Fix integer overflow and truncating by the null character in
:func:`!_winapi.LCMapStringEx` which affects :func:`ntpath.normcase`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-12-13-33-57
.. gh-issue: 107565
.. nonce: SJwqf4
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.10.

..

.. date: 2023-08-12-13-18-15
.. gh-issue: 107565
.. nonce: Tv22Ne
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update multissltests and GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 1.1.1v, 3.0.10,
and 3.1.2.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-16-30-48
.. gh-issue: 95065
.. nonce: -im4R5
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports overriding automatically generated signature by
using directive ``@text_signature``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-10-59-03
.. gh-issue: 107916
.. nonce: KH4Muo
.. section: C API

C API functions :c:func:`PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename`,
:c:func:`PyErr_SetExcFromWindowsErrWithFilename` and
:c:func:`PyErr_SetFromWindowsErrWithFilename` save now the error code before
calling :c:func:`PyUnicode_DecodeFSDefault`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-12-33-00
.. gh-issue: 107915
.. nonce: jQ0wOi
.. section: C API

Such C API functions as ``PyErr_SetString()``, ``PyErr_Format()``,
``PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename()`` and many others no longer crash or
ignore errors if it failed to format the error message or decode the
filename. Instead, they keep a corresponding error.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-11-12-25
.. gh-issue: 107810
.. nonce: oJ40Qx
.. section: C API

Improve :exc:`DeprecationWarning` for uses of :c:type:`PyType_Spec` with
metaclasses that have custom ``tp_new``.
