.. date: 2023-12-07-13-19-55
.. gh-issue: 112125
.. nonce: 4ADN7i
.. release date: 2023-12-07
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix None.__ne__(None) returning NotImplemented instead of False

..

.. date: 2023-12-03-19-34-51
.. gh-issue: 112625
.. nonce: QWTlwS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes a bug where a bytearray object could be cleared while iterating over
an argument in the ``bytearray.join()`` method that could result in reading
memory after it was freed.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-19-02-21
.. gh-issue: 105967
.. nonce: Puq5Cn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Workaround a bug in Apple's macOS platform zlib library where
:func:`zlib.crc32` and :func:`binascii.crc32` could produce incorrect
results on multi-gigabyte inputs. Including when using :mod:`zipfile` on
zips containing large data.

..

.. date: 2023-11-30-23-47-56
.. gh-issue: 112356
.. nonce: g2BqyK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Stopped erroneously deleting a ``LOAD_NULL`` bytecode instruction when
optimized twice.

..

.. date: 2023-11-26-21-30-11
.. gh-issue: 111058
.. nonce: q4DqDY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change coro.cr_frame/gen.gi_frame to return ``None`` after the
coroutine/generator has been closed. This fixes a bug where
:func:`~inspect.getcoroutinestate` and :func:`~inspect.getgeneratorstate`
return the wrong state for a closed coroutine/generator.

..

.. date: 2023-11-25-22-58-49
.. gh-issue: 112388
.. nonce: MU3cIM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an error that was causing the parser to try to overwrite tokenizer
errors. Patch by pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-11-25-22-39-44
.. gh-issue: 112387
.. nonce: AbBq5W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error positions for decoded strings with backwards tokenize errors.
Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-11-24-14-10-57
.. gh-issue: 112367
.. nonce: 9z1IDp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid undefined behaviour when using the perf trampolines by not freeing the
code arenas until shutdown. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-11-20-14-13-02
.. gh-issue: 112243
.. nonce: FKdQnr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't include comments in f-string debug expressions. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-11-19-15-57-23
.. gh-issue: 112266
.. nonce: BSJMbR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change docstrings of :attr:`~object.__dict__` and
:attr:`~object.__weakref__`.

..

.. date: 2023-11-03-01-04-55
.. gh-issue: 111654
.. nonce: scUhDO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix runtime crash when some error happens in opcode
``LOAD_FROM_DICT_OR_DEREF``.

..

.. date: 2023-10-31-14-25-21
.. gh-issue: 109181
.. nonce: 11h6Mc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed up :obj:`Traceback` object creation by lazily compute the line number.
Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-27-19-38-33
.. gh-issue: 102388
.. nonce: vd5YUZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug where ``iso2022_jp_3`` and ``iso2022_jp_2004`` codecs read out of
bounds

..

.. date: 2023-10-27-12-17-49
.. gh-issue: 111366
.. nonce: _TSknV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue in the :mod:`codeop` that was causing :exc:`SyntaxError`
exceptions raised in the presence of invalid syntax to not contain precise
error messages. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-27-11-51-40
.. gh-issue: 111380
.. nonce: vgSbir
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that was causing :exc:`SyntaxWarning` to appear twice when parsing
if invalid syntax is encountered later. Patch by Pablo galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-23-22-11-09
.. gh-issue: 94438
.. nonce: y2pITu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a regression that prevented jumping across ``is None`` and ``is not
None`` when debugging. Patch by Savannah Ostrowski.

..

.. date: 2023-10-17-11-03-45
.. gh-issue: 110938
.. nonce: X3sbMb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error messages for indented blocks with functions and classes with
generic type parameters. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-15-22-18-45
.. gh-issue: 109894
.. nonce: UAmo06
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash due to improperly initialized static :exc:`MemoryError` in
subinterpreter.

..

.. date: 2023-10-12-15-03-24
.. gh-issue: 110782
.. nonce: EqzIzi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when :class:`typing.TypeVar` is constructed with a keyword
argument. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-13-46-14
.. gh-issue: 110696
.. nonce: J9kSzr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect error message for invalid argument unpacking. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-09-19-54-33
.. gh-issue: 110543
.. nonce: 1wrxO8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix regression in Python 3.12 where :meth:`types.CodeType.replace` would
produce a broken code object if called on a module or class code object that
contains a comprehension. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-10-08-20-08-54
.. gh-issue: 110514
.. nonce: Q9bdRU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add ``PY_THROW`` to :func:`sys.setprofile` events

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-12-00-43
.. gh-issue: 110455
.. nonce: 8BjNGg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Guard ``assert(tstate->thread_id > 0)`` with ``#ifndef HAVE_PTHREAD_STUBS``.
This allows for for pydebug builds to work under WASI which (currently)
lacks thread support.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-11-43-48
.. gh-issue: 110259
.. nonce: ka93x5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly identify the format spec in f-strings (with single or triple
quotes) that have multiple lines in the expression part and include a
formatting spec. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-23-17-08
.. gh-issue: 110237
.. nonce: _Xub0z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing error checks for calls to ``PyList_Append`` in
``_PyEval_MatchClass``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-21-35-49
.. gh-issue: 109889
.. nonce: t5hIRT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the compiler's redundant NOP detection algorithm to skip over NOPs with
no line number when looking for the next instruction's lineno.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-18-01-06
.. gh-issue: 109853
.. nonce: coQQiL
.. section: Core and Builtins

``sys.path[0]`` is now set correctly for subinterpreters.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-14-00-25
.. gh-issue: 105716
.. nonce: SUJkW1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Subinterpreters now correctly handle the case where they have threads
running in the background.  Before, such threads would interfere with
cleaning up and destroying them, as well as prevent running another script.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-09-24-10
.. gh-issue: 109793
.. nonce: zFQBkv
.. section: Core and Builtins

The main thread no longer exits prematurely when a subinterpreter is cleaned
up during runtime finalization.  The bug was a problem particularly because,
when triggered, the Python process would always return with a 0 exitcode,
even if it failed.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-13-18-08
.. gh-issue: 109596
.. nonce: RG0K2G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some tokens in the grammar that were incorrectly marked as soft
keywords. Also fix some repeated rule names and ensure that repeated rules
are not allowed. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-16-00-42
.. gh-issue: 109351
.. nonce: kznGeR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when compiling an invalid AST involving a named (walrus)
expression.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-12-41-42
.. gh-issue: 109216
.. nonce: 60QOSb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible memory leak in :opcode:`BUILD_MAP`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-18-53-55
.. gh-issue: 109207
.. nonce: Fei8bY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a SystemError in ``__repr__`` of symtable entry object.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-21-17-18
.. gh-issue: 109179
.. nonce: ZR8qs2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where the C traceback display drops notes from :exc:`SyntaxError`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-18-49-01
.. gh-issue: 109052
.. nonce: TBU4nC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use the base opcode when comparing code objects to avoid interference from
instrumentation

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-16-05-36
.. gh-issue: 88943
.. nonce: rH_X3W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve syntax error for non-ASCII character that follows a numerical
literal. It now points on the invalid non-ASCII character, not on the valid
numerical literal.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-15-29-26
.. gh-issue: 106931
.. nonce: kKU1le
.. section: Core and Builtins

Statically allocated string objects are now interned globally instead of
per-interpreter.  This fixes a situation where such a string would only be
interned in a single interpreter. Normal string objects are unaffected.

..

.. date: 2023-12-05-18-57-53
.. gh-issue: 79325
.. nonce: P2vMVK
.. section: Library

Fix an infinite recursion error in :func:`tempfile.TemporaryDirectory`
cleanup on Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-12-03-12-41-48
.. gh-issue: 112645
.. nonce: blMsKf
.. section: Library

Remove deprecation error on passing ``onerror`` to :func:`shutil.rmtree`.

..

.. date: 2023-12-02-12-55-17
.. gh-issue: 112618
.. nonce: 7_FT8-
.. section: Library

Fix a caching bug relating to :data:`typing.Annotated`. ``Annotated[str,
True]`` is no longer identical to ``Annotated[str, 1]``.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-21-05-46
.. gh-issue: 112334
.. nonce: DmNXKh
.. section: Library

Fixed a performance regression in 3.12's :mod:`subprocess` on Linux where it
would no longer use the fast-path ``vfork()`` system call when it should
have due to a logic bug, instead always falling back to the safe but slower
``fork()``.

Also fixed a related 3.12 security regression: If a value of
``extra_groups=[]`` was passed to :mod:`subprocess.Popen` or related APIs,
the underlying ``setgroups(0, NULL)`` system call to clear the groups list
would not be made in the child process prior to ``exec()``.  This has been
assigned :cve:`2023-6507`.

This was identified via code inspection in the process of fixing the first
bug.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-18-05-09
.. gh-issue: 110190
.. nonce: 5bf-c9
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes structs with array on Arm platform by setting ``MAX_STRUCT_SIZE``
to 32 in stgdict. Patch by Diego Russo.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-08-28-09
.. gh-issue: 112578
.. nonce: bfNbfi
.. section: Library

Fix a spurious :exc:`RuntimeWarning` when executing the :mod:`zipfile`
module.

..

.. date: 2023-11-28-20-01-33
.. gh-issue: 112509
.. nonce: QtoKed
.. section: Library

Fix edge cases that could cause a key to be present in both the
``__required_keys__`` and ``__optional_keys__`` attributes of a
:class:`typing.TypedDict`. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-11-26-13-44-19
.. gh-issue: 112414
.. nonce: kx2E7S
.. section: Library

Fix regression in Python 3.12 where calling :func:`repr` on a module that
had been imported using a custom :term:`loader` could fail with
:exc:`AttributeError`. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-11-26-13-26-56
.. gh-issue: 112358
.. nonce: smhaeZ
.. section: Library

Revert change to :class:`struct.Struct` initialization that broke some cases
of subclassing.

..

.. date: 2023-11-24-21-00-24
.. gh-issue: 94722
.. nonce: GMIQIn
.. section: Library

Fix bug where comparison between instances of :class:`~doctest.DocTest`
fails if one of them has ``None`` as its lineno.

..

.. date: 2023-11-15-04-53-37
.. gh-issue: 112105
.. nonce: I3RcVN
.. section: Library

Make :func:`readline.set_completer_delims` work with libedit

..

.. date: 2023-11-14-18-43-55
.. gh-issue: 111942
.. nonce: x1pnrj
.. section: Library

Fix SystemError in the TextIOWrapper constructor with non-encodable "errors"
argument in non-debug mode.

..

.. date: 2023-11-11-16-42-48
.. gh-issue: 109538
.. nonce: cMG5ux
.. section: Library

Issue warning message instead of having :class:`RuntimeError` be displayed
when event loop has already been closed at :meth:`StreamWriter.__del__`.

..

.. date: 2023-11-10-22-08-28
.. gh-issue: 111942
.. nonce: MDFm6v
.. section: Library

Fix crashes in :meth:`io.TextIOWrapper.reconfigure` when pass invalid
arguments, e.g. non-string encoding.

..

.. date: 2023-11-09-12-57-43
.. gh-issue: 111460
.. nonce: TQaz9I
.. section: Library

:mod:`curses`: restore wide character support (including
:func:`curses.unget_wch` and :meth:`~curses.window.get_wch`) on macOS, which
was unavailable due to a regression in Python 3.12.

..

.. date: 2023-11-09-10-45-56
.. gh-issue: 103791
.. nonce: sdfkja
.. section: Library

:class:`contextlib.suppress` now supports suppressing exceptions raised as
part of a :exc:`BaseExceptionGroup`, in addition to the recent support for
:exc:`ExceptionGroup`.

..

.. date: 2023-11-08-15-58-57
.. gh-issue: 111804
.. nonce: uAXTOL
.. section: Library

Remove posix.fallocate() under WASI as the underlying posix_fallocate() is
not available in WASI preview2.

..

.. date: 2023-11-08-11-50-49
.. gh-issue: 111841
.. nonce: iSqdQf
.. section: Library

Fix truncating arguments on an embedded null character in :meth:`os.putenv`
and :meth:`os.unsetenv` on Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-11-04-10-24-25
.. gh-issue: 111541
.. nonce: x0RBI1
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`doctest` for :exc:`SyntaxError` not-builtin subclasses.

..

.. date: 2023-11-01-14-03-24
.. gh-issue: 110894
.. nonce: 7-wZxC
.. section: Library

Call loop exception handler for exceptions in ``client_connected_cb`` of
:func:`asyncio.start_server` so that applications can handle it. Patch by
Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-10-31-07-46-56
.. gh-issue: 111531
.. nonce: 6zUV_G
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in ``bind_class()`` and ``bind_all()`` methods of
:mod:`tkinter` widgets.

..

.. date: 2023-10-30-08-50-46
.. gh-issue: 111356
.. nonce: Bc8LvA
.. section: Library

Added :func:`io.text_encoding()`, :data:`io.DEFAULT_BUFFER_SIZE`, and
:class:`io.IncrementalNewlineDecoder` to ``io.__all__``.

..

.. date: 2023-10-28-04-21-17
.. gh-issue: 111342
.. nonce: m8Ln1k
.. section: Library

Fixed typo in :func:`math.sumprod`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-27-12-46-56
.. gh-issue: 68166
.. nonce: 0EbWW4
.. section: Library

Remove mention of not supported "vsapi" element type in
:meth:`tkinter.ttk.Style.element_create`. Add tests for ``element_create()``
and other ``ttk.Style`` methods. Add examples for ``element_create()`` in
the documentation.

..

.. date: 2023-10-25-16-37-13
.. gh-issue: 75666
.. nonce: BpsWut
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of :mod:`tkinter` widget's ``unbind()`` method with two
arguments. Previously, ``widget.unbind(sequence, funcid)`` destroyed the
current binding for *sequence*, leaving *sequence* unbound, and deleted the
*funcid* command. Now it removes only *funcid* from the binding for
*sequence*, keeping other commands, and deletes the *funcid* command. It
leaves *sequence* unbound only if *funcid* was the last bound command.

..

.. date: 2023-10-25-11-54-00
.. gh-issue: 79033
.. nonce: 5ePgFl
.. section: Library

Another attempt at fixing :func:`asyncio.Server.wait_closed()`. It now
blocks until both conditions are true: the server is closed, *and* there are
no more active connections. (This means that in some cases where in 3.12.0
this function would *incorrectly* have returned immediately, it will now
block; in particular, when there are no active connections but the server
hasn't been closed yet.)

..

.. date: 2023-10-25-08-42-05
.. gh-issue: 111295
.. nonce: H2K4lf
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`time` not checking for errors when initializing.

..

.. date: 2023-10-24-12-20-46
.. gh-issue: 111253
.. nonce: HFywSK
.. section: Library

Add error checking during :mod:`!_socket` module init.

..

.. date: 2023-10-24-12-09-46
.. gh-issue: 111251
.. nonce: urFYtn
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`_blake2` not checking for errors when initializing.

..

.. date: 2023-10-23-13-53-58
.. gh-issue: 111174
.. nonce: Oohmzd
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :meth:`io.BytesIO.getbuffer` called repeatedly for empty
BytesIO.

..

.. date: 2023-10-22-21-28-05
.. gh-issue: 111187
.. nonce: _W11Ab
.. section: Library

Postpone removal version for locale.getdefaultlocale() to Python 3.15.

..

.. date: 2023-10-21-13-57-06
.. gh-issue: 111159
.. nonce: GoHp7s
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`doctest` output comparison for exceptions with notes.

..

.. date: 2023-10-20-15-29-10
.. gh-issue: 110910
.. nonce: u2oPwX
.. section: Library

Fix invalid state handling in :class:`asyncio.TaskGroup` and
:class:`asyncio.Timeout`. They now raise proper RuntimeError if they are
improperly used and are left in consistent state after this.

..

.. date: 2023-10-19-22-46-34
.. gh-issue: 111092
.. nonce: hgut12
.. section: Library

Make turtledemo run without default root enabled.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-22-54-56
.. gh-issue: 110488
.. nonce: 2I7OiZ
.. section: Library

Fix a couple of issues in :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.with_name`: a single dot
was incorrectly considered a valid name, and in :class:`PureWindowsPath`, a
name with an NTFS alternate data stream, like ``a:b``, was incorrectly
considered invalid.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-17-56-41
.. gh-issue: 110392
.. nonce: 6g6CnP
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`tty.setraw` and :func:`tty.setcbreak`: previously they returned
partially modified list of the original tty attributes.
:func:`tty.cfmakeraw` and :func:`tty.cfmakecbreak` now make a copy of the
list of special characters before modifying it.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-10-46-55
.. gh-issue: 110590
.. nonce: fatz-h
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :meth:`!_sre.compile` where :exc:`TypeError` would be
overwritten by :exc:`OverflowError` when the *code* argument was a list of
non-ints.

..

.. date: 2023-10-09-19-09-32
.. gh-issue: 65052
.. nonce: C2mRlo
.. section: Library

Prevent :mod:`pdb` from crashing when trying to display undisplayable
objects

..

.. date: 2023-10-08-18-15-02
.. gh-issue: 110519
.. nonce: RDGe8-
.. section: Library

Deprecation warning about non-integer number in :mod:`gettext` now alwais
refers to the line in the user code where gettext function or method is
used. Previously it could refer to a line in ``gettext`` code.

..

.. date: 2023-10-08-14-17-06
.. gh-issue: 110395
.. nonce: _tdCsV
.. section: Library

Ensure that :func:`select.kqueue` objects correctly appear as closed in
forked children, to prevent operations on an invalid file descriptor.

..

.. date: 2023-10-07-13-50-12
.. gh-issue: 110378
.. nonce: Y4L8fl
.. section: Library

:func:`~contextlib.contextmanager` and
:func:`~contextlib.asynccontextmanager` context managers now close an
invalid underlying generator object that yields more then one value.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-18-56-29
.. gh-issue: 110365
.. nonce: LCxiau
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`termios.tcsetattr` bug that was overwritting existing errors
during parsing integers from ``term`` list.

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-15-40-10
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: iB0peK
.. section: Library

Fix a Python 3.12 regression in the import time of :mod:`random`. Patch by
Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-05-23-27
.. gh-issue: 110196
.. nonce: djwt0z
.. section: Library

Add ``__reduce__`` method to :class:`IPv6Address` in order to keep
``scope_id``

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-53-11
.. gh-issue: 110036
.. nonce: fECxTj
.. section: Library

On Windows, multiprocessing ``Popen.terminate()`` now catchs
:exc:`PermissionError` and get the process exit code. If the process is
still running, raise again the :exc:`PermissionError`. Otherwise, the
process terminated as expected: store its exit code. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-50-33
.. gh-issue: 110038
.. nonce: nx_gCu
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue that caused :meth:`KqueueSelector.select` to not return all
the ready events in some cases when a file descriptor is registered for both
read and write.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-23-00-37
.. gh-issue: 109631
.. nonce: eWSqpO
.. section: Library

:mod:`re` functions such as :func:`re.findall`, :func:`re.split`,
:func:`re.search` and :func:`re.sub` which perform short repeated matches
can now be interrupted by user.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-20-05-41
.. gh-issue: 109747
.. nonce: _cRJH8
.. section: Library

Improve errors for unsupported look-behind patterns. Now re.error is raised
instead of OverflowError or RuntimeError for too large width of look-behind
pattern.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-09-59-59
.. gh-issue: 109818
.. nonce: dLRtT-
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`reprlib.recursive_repr` not copying ``__type_params__`` from
decorated function.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-02-11-14
.. gh-issue: 109047
.. nonce: b1TrqG
.. section: Library

:mod:`concurrent.futures`: The *executor manager thread* now catches
exceptions when adding an item to the *call queue*. During Python
finalization, creating a new thread can now raise :exc:`RuntimeError`. Catch
the exception and call ``terminate_broken()`` in this case. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-24-16-43-33
.. gh-issue: 109782
.. nonce: gMC_7z
.. section: Library

Ensure the signature of :func:`os.path.isdir` is identical on all platforms.
Patch by Amin Alaee.

..

.. date: 2023-09-24-06-04-14
.. gh-issue: 109590
.. nonce: 9EMofC
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.which` will prefer files with an extension in ``PATHEXT`` if
the given mode includes ``os.X_OK`` on win32. If no ``PATHEXT`` match is
found, a file without an extension in ``PATHEXT`` can be returned. This
change will have :func:`shutil.which` act more similarly to previous
behavior in Python 3.11.

..

.. date: 2023-09-23-14-40-51
.. gh-issue: 109786
.. nonce: UX3pKv
.. section: Library

Fix possible reference leaks and crash when re-enter the ``__next__()``
method of :class:`itertools.pairwise`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-20-16-44
.. gh-issue: 109593
.. nonce: LboaNM
.. section: Library

Avoid deadlocking on a reentrant call to the multiprocessing resource
tracker. Such a reentrant call, though unlikely, can happen if a GC pass
invokes the finalizer for a multiprocessing object such as SemLock.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-17-45-46
.. gh-issue: 109613
.. nonce: P13ogN
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`os.stat` and :meth:`os.DirEntry.stat`: check for exceptions.
Previously, on Python built in debug mode, these functions could trigger a
fatal Python error (and abort the process) when a function succeeded with an
exception set. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-17-22-44
.. gh-issue: 109375
.. nonce: ijJHZ9
.. section: Library

The :mod:`pdb` ``alias`` command now prevents registering aliases without
arguments.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-00-32-18
.. gh-issue: 107219
.. nonce: 3zqyFT
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in ``concurrent.futures``. When a process in the
process pool was terminated abruptly (while the future was running or
pending), close the connection write end. If the call queue is blocked on
sending bytes to a worker process, closing the connection write end
interrupts the send, so the queue can be closed. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-15-08-37
.. gh-issue: 50644
.. nonce: JUAZOh
.. section: Library

Attempts to pickle or create a shallow or deep copy of :mod:`codecs` streams
now raise a TypeError. Previously, copying failed with a RecursionError,
while pickling produced wrong results that eventually caused unpickling to
fail with a RecursionError.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-12-09-55
.. gh-issue: 108987
.. nonce: x5AIG8
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`_thread.start_new_thread` race condition. If a thread is created
during Python finalization, the newly spawned thread now exits immediately
instead of trying to access freed memory and lead to a crash. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-16-07-23
.. gh-issue: 108791
.. nonce: fBcAqh
.. section: Library

Improved error handling in :mod:`pdb` command line interface, making it
produce more concise error messages.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-12-35-39
.. gh-issue: 105829
.. nonce: kyYhWI
.. section: Library

Fix concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor deadlock

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-08-56-40
.. gh-issue: 106584
.. nonce: g-SBtC
.. section: Library

Fix exit code for ``unittest`` if all tests are skipped. Patch by Egor
Eliseev.

..

.. date: 2023-04-15-14-45-21
.. gh-issue: 102956
.. nonce: Z6qeUy
.. section: Library

Fix returning of empty byte strings after seek in zipfile module

..

.. date: 2022-12-24-12-50-54
.. gh-issue: 84867
.. nonce: OhaLbU
.. section: Library

:class:`unittest.TestLoader` no longer loads test cases from exact
:class:`unittest.TestCase` and :class:`unittest.FunctionTestCase` classes.

..

.. date: 2022-12-01-16-57-44
.. gh-issue: 91133
.. nonce: LKMVCV
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :class:`tempfile.TemporaryDirectory` cleanup, which now no
longer dereferences symlinks when working around file system permission
errors.

..

.. date: 2022-05-28-20-55-07
.. gh-issue: 73561
.. nonce: YRmAvy
.. section: Library

Omit the interface scope from an IPv6 address when used as Host header by
:mod:`http.client`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-06-15-49-57
.. gh-issue: 86826
.. nonce: rf006W
.. section: Library

:mod:`zipinfo` now supports the full range of values in the TZ string
determined by RFC 8536 and detects all invalid formats. Both Python and C
implementations now raise exceptions of the same type on invalid data.

..

.. bpo: 43153
.. date: 2021-12-06-22-10-53
.. nonce: J7mjSy
.. section: Library

On Windows, ``tempfile.TemporaryDirectory`` previously masked a
``PermissionError`` with ``NotADirectoryError`` during directory cleanup. It
now correctly raises ``PermissionError`` if errors are not ignored. Patch by
Andrei Kulakov and Ken Jin.

..

.. bpo: 35332
.. date: 2020-12-14-09-31-13
.. nonce: s22wAx
.. section: Library

The :func:`shutil.rmtree` function now ignores errors when calling
:func:`os.close` when *ignore_errors* is ``True``, and :func:`os.close` no
longer retried after error.

..

.. bpo: 41422
.. date: 2020-07-28-20-48-05
.. nonce: iMwnMu
.. section: Library

Fixed memory leaks of :class:`pickle.Pickler` and :class:`pickle.Unpickler`
involving cyclic references via the internal memo mapping.

..

.. bpo: 40262
.. date: 2020-05-21-23-32-46
.. nonce: z4fQv1
.. section: Library

The :meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.recv_into` method no longer requires the *buffer*
argument to implement ``__len__`` and supports buffers with arbitrary item
size.

..

.. date: 2023-11-30-02-33-59
.. gh-issue: 111699
.. nonce: _O5G_y
.. section: Documentation

Relocate ``smtpd`` deprecation notice to its own section rather than under
``locale`` in What's New in Python 3.12 document

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-13-43-49
.. gh-issue: 108826
.. nonce: KG7abS
.. section: Documentation

:mod:`dis` module command-line interface is now mentioned in documentation.

..

.. date: 2023-12-05-19-50-03
.. gh-issue: 112769
.. nonce: kdLJmS
.. section: Tests

The tests now correctly compare zlib version when
:const:`zlib.ZLIB_RUNTIME_VERSION` contains non-integer suffixes. For
example zlib-ng defines the version as ``1.3.0.zlib-ng``.

..

.. date: 2023-10-31-22-09-25
.. gh-issue: 110367
.. nonce: UhQi44
.. section: Tests

Make regrtest ``--verbose3`` option compatible with ``--huntrleaks -jN``
options. The ``./python -m test -j1 -R 3:3 --verbose3`` command now works as
expected. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-21-19-27-36
.. gh-issue: 111165
.. nonce: FU6mUk
.. section: Tests

Remove no longer used functions ``run_unittest()`` and ``run_doctest()``
from the :mod:`test.support` module.

..

.. date: 2023-10-21-00-10-36
.. gh-issue: 110932
.. nonce: jktjJU
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest if the ``SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH`` environment variable is defined:
use the variable value as the random seed. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-17-17-54-36
.. gh-issue: 110995
.. nonce: Fx8KRD
.. section: Tests

test_gdb: Fix detection of gdb built without Python scripting support. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-16-13-47-24
.. gh-issue: 110918
.. nonce: aFgZK3
.. section: Tests

Test case matching patterns specified by options ``--match``, ``--ignore``,
``--matchfile`` and ``--ignorefile`` are now tested in the order of
specification, and the last match determines whether the test case be run or
ignored.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-23-20-13
.. gh-issue: 110647
.. nonce: jKG3sY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_stress_modifying_handlers() of test_signal. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-02-32-18
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: VfxBLI
.. section: Tests

Fix test_tools.test_freeze on FreeBSD: run "make distclean" instead of "make
clean" in the copied source directory to remove also the "python" program.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-19-33-49
.. gh-issue: 110167
.. nonce: mIdj3v
.. section: Tests

Fix a deadlock in test_socket when server fails with a timeout but the
client is still running in its thread. Don't hold a lock to call cleanup
functions in doCleanups(). One of the cleanup function waits until the
client completes, whereas the client could deadlock if it called
addCleanup() in such situation. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-14-22-48
.. gh-issue: 110388
.. nonce: 1-HQJO
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :mod:`tty`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-13-46-50
.. gh-issue: 81002
.. nonce: bOcuV6
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :mod:`termios`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-10-54-09
.. gh-issue: 110267
.. nonce: O-c47G
.. section: Tests

Add tests for pickling and copying PyStructSequence objects. Patched by
Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-14-11-30
.. gh-issue: 110031
.. nonce: fQnFnc
.. section: Tests

Skip test_threading tests using thread+fork if Python is built with Address
Sanitizer (ASAN). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-12-48-42
.. gh-issue: 110088
.. nonce: qUhRga
.. section: Tests

Fix test_asyncio timeouts: don't measure the maximum duration, a test should
not measure a CI performance. Only measure the minimum duration when a task
has a timeout or delay. Add ``CLOCK_RES`` to ``test_asyncio.utils``. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-00-19-21
.. gh-issue: 109974
.. nonce: Sh_g-r
.. section: Tests

Fix race conditions in test_threading lock tests. Wait until a condition is
met rather than using :func:`time.sleep` with a hardcoded number of seconds.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-14-52
.. gh-issue: 110033
.. nonce: 2yHMx0
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_interprocess_signal()`` of ``test_signal``. Make sure that the
``subprocess.Popen`` object is deleted before the test raising an exception
in a signal handler. Otherwise, ``Popen.__del__()`` can get the exception
which is logged as ``Exception ignored in: ...`` and the test fails. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-14-47-14
.. gh-issue: 109594
.. nonce: DB5KPP
.. section: Tests

Fix test_timeout() of test_concurrent_futures.test_wait. Remove the future
which may or may not complete depending if it takes longer than the timeout
ot not. Keep the second future which does not complete before wait()
timeout. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-12-25-19
.. gh-issue: 109972
.. nonce: GYnwIP
.. section: Tests

Split test_gdb.py file into a test_gdb package made of multiple tests, so
tests can now be run in parallel. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-02-32-17
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: AoUJuK
.. section: Tests

Skip test_freeze_simple_script() of test_tools.test_freeze if Python is
built with ``./configure --enable-optimizations``, which means with Profile
Guided Optimization (PGO): it just makes the test too slow. The freeze tool
is tested by many other CIs with other (faster) compiler flags. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-19-08-22
.. gh-issue: 109580
.. nonce: G02Zam
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_perf_profiler`` if Python is built with ASAN, MSAN or UBSAN
sanitizer. Python does crash randomly in this test on such build. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-05-58-09
.. gh-issue: 104736
.. nonce: lA25Fu
.. section: Tests

Fix test_gdb on Python built with LLVM clang 16 on Linux ppc64le (ex: Fedora
38). Search patterns in gdb "bt" command output to detect when gdb fails to
retrieve the traceback. For example, skip a test if ``Backtrace stopped:
frame did not save the PC`` is found. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-20-46-35
.. gh-issue: 108927
.. nonce: TpwWav
.. section: Tests

Fixed order dependence in running tests in the same process when a test that
has submodules (e.g. test_importlib) follows a test that imports its
submodule (e.g. test_importlib.util) and precedes a test (e.g. test_unittest
or test_compileall) that uses that submodule.

..

.. date: 2023-11-15-13-40-29
.. gh-issue: 112088
.. nonce: UJQxxh
.. section: Build

Add ``Tools/build/regen-configure.sh`` script to regenerate the
``configure`` with an Ubuntu container image. The
``quay.io/tiran/cpython_autoconf:271`` container image
(`tiran/cpython_autoconf <https://github.com/tiran/cpython_autoconf>`_) is
no longer used. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-20-15-29-31
.. gh-issue: 111046
.. nonce: 2DxQl8
.. section: Build

For wasi-threads, memory is now exported to fix compatibility issues with
some wasm runtimes.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-02-15-23
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: --7JUF
.. section: Build

"make check-clean-src" now also checks if the "python" program is found in
the source directory: fail with an error if it does exist. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-11-46-20
.. gh-issue: 109191
.. nonce: imUkVN
.. section: Build

Fix compile error when building with recent versions of libedit.

..

.. date: 2023-11-13-22-35-27
.. gh-issue: 111856
.. nonce: vEtA5z
.. section: Windows

Fixes :func:`~os.fstat` on file systems that do not support file ID
requests. This includes FAT32 and exFAT.

..

.. date: 2023-10-25-05-01-28
.. gh-issue: 111293
.. nonce: FSsLT6
.. section: Windows

Fix :data:`os.DirEntry.inode` dropping higher 64 bits of a file id on some
filesystems on Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-10-19-21-46-18
.. gh-issue: 110913
.. nonce: CWlPfg
.. section: Windows

WindowsConsoleIO now correctly chunks large buffers without splitting up
UTF-8 sequences.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-14-20-14
.. gh-issue: 110437
.. nonce: xpYy9q
.. section: Windows

Allows overriding the source of VC redistributables so that releases can be
guaranteed to never downgrade between updates.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-15-23-23
.. gh-issue: 109286
.. nonce: N8OzMg
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.43.1.

..

.. date: 2023-12-06-12-11-13
.. gh-issue: 109981
.. nonce: mOHg10
.. section: macOS

Use ``/dev/fd`` on macOS to determine the number of open files in
``test.support.os_helper.fd_count`` to avoid a crash with "guarded" file
descriptors when probing for open files.

..

.. date: 2023-10-18-17-26-36
.. gh-issue: 110950
.. nonce: sonoma
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to include an upstream Tcl/Tk fix for the ``Secure
coding is not enabled for restorable state!`` warning encountered in Tkinter
on macOS 14 Sonoma.

..

.. date: 2023-10-18-01-40-36
.. gh-issue: 111015
.. nonce: NaLI2L
.. section: macOS

Ensure that IDLE.app and Python Launcher.app are installed with appropriate
permissions on macOS builds.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-23-38-24
.. gh-issue: 109286
.. nonce: 1ZLMaq
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.43.1.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-08-49-57
.. gh-issue: 71383
.. nonce: Ttkchg
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to include an upstream Tcl/Tk fix for the
``ttk::ThemeChanged`` error encountered in Tkinter.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-16-33-57
.. gh-issue: 92603
.. nonce: ATkKVO
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to include a fix accepted by upstream Tcl/Tk for a
crash encountered after the first :meth:`tkinter.Tk` instance is destroyed.

..

.. bpo: 35668
.. date: 2019-01-07-06-18-25
.. nonce: JimxP5
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings to the IDLE debugger module. Fix two bugs: initialize
Idb.botframe (should be in Bdb); in Idb.in_rpc_code, check whether
prev_frame is None before trying to use it. Greatly expand test_debugger.

..

.. date: 2023-12-02-02-08-11
.. gh-issue: 106560
.. nonce: THvuji
.. section: C API

Fix redundant declarations in the public C API. Declare PyBool_Type and
PyLong_Type only once. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-11-27-09-44-16
.. gh-issue: 112438
.. nonce: GdNZiI
.. section: C API

Fix support of format units "es", "et", "es#", and "et#" in nested tuples in
:c:func:`PyArg_ParseTuple`-like functions.

..

.. date: 2023-09-17-21-47-31
.. gh-issue: 109521
.. nonce: JDF6i9
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyImport_GetImporter` now sets RuntimeError if it fails to get
:data:`sys.path_hooks` or :data:`sys.path_importer_cache` or they are not
list and dict correspondingly. Previously it could return NULL without
setting error in obscure cases, crash or raise SystemError if these
attributes have wrong type.
