.. date: 2022-09-28-17-09-37
.. gh-issue: 97616
.. nonce: K1e3Xs
.. release date: 2022-10-25
.. section: Security

Fix multiplying a list by an integer (``list *= int``): detect the integer
overflow when the new allocated length is close to the maximum size. Issue
reported by Jordan Limor.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-10-42-00
.. gh-issue: 97514
.. nonce: Yggdsl
.. section: Security

On Linux the :mod:`multiprocessing` module returns to using filesystem
backed unix domain sockets for communication with the *forkserver* process
instead of the Linux abstract socket namespace.  Only code that chooses to
use the :ref:`"forkserver" start method <multiprocessing-start-methods>` is
affected.

Abstract sockets have no permissions and could allow any user on the system
in the same `network namespace
<https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/network_namespaces.7.html>`_ (often
the whole system) to inject code into the multiprocessing *forkserver*
process. This was a potential privilege escalation. Filesystem based socket
permissions restrict this to the *forkserver* process user as was the
default in Python 3.8 and earlier.

This prevents Linux :cve:`2022-42919`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-20-09-23
.. gh-issue: 87389
.. nonce: QVaC3f
.. section: Security

:mod:`http.server`: Fix an open redirection vulnerability in the HTTP server
when an URI path starts with ``//``.  Vulnerability discovered, and initial
fix proposed, by Hamza Avvan.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-12-52-53
.. gh-issue: 79096
.. nonce: YVoxgC
.. section: Security

LWPCookieJar and MozillaCookieJar create files with file mode 600 instead of
644 (Microsoft Windows is not affected)

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-08-53-07
.. gh-issue: 92888
.. nonce: TLtR9W
.. section: Security

Fix ``memoryview`` use after free when accessing the backing buffer in
certain cases.

..

.. date: 2022-04-27-18-25-30
.. gh-issue: 68966
.. nonce: gjS8zs
.. section: Security

The deprecated mailcap module now refuses to inject unsafe text (filenames,
MIME types, parameters) into shell commands. Instead of using such text, it
will warn and act as if a match was not found (or for test commands, as if
the test failed).

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-23-48-46
.. gh-issue: 98374
.. nonce: eOBh8M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Suppress ImportError for invalid query for help() command. Patch by Donghee
Na.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-20-53-38
.. gh-issue: 98461
.. nonce: iNmPDV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source location in bytecode for list, set and dict comprehensions as
well as generator expressions.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-18-03-28
.. gh-issue: 98354
.. nonce: GRGta3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added unicode check for ``name`` attribute of ``spec`` argument passed in
:func:`!_imp.create_builtin` function.

..

.. date: 2022-10-18-16-17-44
.. gh-issue: 98398
.. nonce: x4rYK_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source location of 'assert' bytecodes.

..

.. date: 2022-10-18-14-11-32
.. gh-issue: 98390
.. nonce: H1sxJu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix location of sub-expressions of boolean expressions, by reducing their
scope to that of the sub-expression.

..

.. date: 2022-10-13-23-23-01
.. gh-issue: 98254
.. nonce: bC8IKt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modules from the standard library are now potentially suggested as part of
the error messages displayed by the interpreter when an :exc:`NameError` is
raised to the top level. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-23-13-34
.. gh-issue: 97997
.. nonce: JQaJKF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add running column offset to the tokenizer state to avoid calculating AST
column information with pointer arithmetic.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-20-41-29
.. gh-issue: 97973
.. nonce: gB-xWi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify the tokenizer to return all necessary information the parser needs to
set location information in the AST nodes, so that the parser does not have
to calculate those doing pointer arithmetic.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-15-45-57
.. gh-issue: 96078
.. nonce: fS-6mU
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`os.sched_yield` now release the GIL while calling sched_yield(2).
Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-14-14-28
.. gh-issue: 97955
.. nonce: Nq5VXD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Migrate :mod:`zoneinfo` to Argument Clinic.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-06-36-29
.. gh-issue: 97912
.. nonce: jGRJpa
.. section: Core and Builtins

The compiler now avoids quadratic behavior when finding which instructions
should use the :opcode:`LOAD_FAST_CHECK` opcode.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-02-11-34
.. gh-issue: 97002
.. nonce: Zvsk71
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where several frame objects could be backed by the same
interpreter frame, possibly leading to corrupted memory and hard crashes of
the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-17-02-22
.. gh-issue: 97943
.. nonce: LYAWlE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Bugfix: :c:func:`PyFunction_GetAnnotations` should return a borrowed
reference. It was returning a new reference.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-11-37-15
.. gh-issue: 97922
.. nonce: Zu9Bge
.. section: Core and Builtins

The Garbage Collector now runs only on the eval breaker mechanism of the
Python bytecode evaluation loop instead on object allocations. The GC can
also run when :c:func:`PyErr_CheckSignals` is called so C extensions that
need to run for a long time without executing any Python code also have a
chance to execute the GC periodically.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-00-37-27
.. gh-issue: 65961
.. nonce: z0Ys0y
.. section: Core and Builtins

When ``__package__`` is different than ``__spec__.parent``, raise a
``DeprecationWarning`` instead of ``ImportWarning``.

Also remove ``importlib.util.set_package()`` which was scheduled for
removal.

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-17-02-18
.. gh-issue: 97850
.. nonce: E3QTRA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Long deprecated, ``module_repr()`` should now be completely eradicated.

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-14-04-40
.. gh-issue: 86298
.. nonce: QVM7G1
.. section: Core and Builtins

In cases where ``warnings.warn_explicit()`` consults the module's loader, an
``DeprecationWarning`` is issued when ``m.__loader__`` differs from
``m.__spec__.loader``.

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-02-00-10
.. gh-issue: 97779
.. nonce: f3N1hI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that all Python frame objects are backed by "complete" frames.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-16-12-39
.. gh-issue: 91052
.. nonce: MsYL9d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add API for subscribing to modification events on selected dictionaries.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-13-35-48
.. gh-issue: 97752
.. nonce: 0xTjJY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible data corruption or crashes when accessing the ``f_back`` member
of newly-created generator or coroutine frames.

..

.. date: 2022-10-01-08-55-09
.. gh-issue: 97591
.. nonce: pw6kkH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a missing incref/decref pair in ``Exception.__setstate__()``. Patch by
Ofey Chan.

..

.. date: 2022-09-30-13-26-58
.. gh-issue: 97670
.. nonce: n61vMR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the :func:`sys.getdxp` function and the
``Tools/scripts/analyze_dxp.py`` script. DXP stands for "dynamic execution
pairs". They were related to ``DYNAMIC_EXECUTION_PROFILE`` and ``DXPAIRS``
macros which have been removed in Python 3.11. Python can now be built with
:option:`./configure --enable-pystats <--enable-pystats>` to gather
statistics on Python opcodes.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-15-19-29
.. gh-issue: 94526
.. nonce: wq5m6T
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the Python path configuration used to initialized :data:`sys.path` at
Python startup. Paths are no longer encoded to UTF-8/strict to avoid
encoding errors if it contains surrogate characters (bytes paths are decoded
with the surrogateescape error handler). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-27-11-59-13
.. gh-issue: 96670
.. nonce: XrBBit
.. section: Core and Builtins

The parser now raises :exc:`SyntaxError` when parsing source code containing
null bytes. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-09-21-16-06-37
.. gh-issue: 96975
.. nonce: BmE0XY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash occurring when :c:func:`PyEval_GetFrame` is called while the
topmost Python frame is in a partially-initialized state.

..

.. date: 2022-09-21-14-38-31
.. gh-issue: 96848
.. nonce: WuoLzU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix command line parsing: reject :option:`-X int_max_str_digits <-X>` option
with no value (invalid) when the :envvar:`PYTHONINTMAXSTRDIGITS` environment
variable is set to a valid limit. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-20-11-06-45
.. gh-issue: 95921
.. nonce: dkcRQn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overly-broad source position information for chained comparisons used as
branching conditions.

..

.. date: 2022-09-19-03-35-01
.. gh-issue: 96821
.. nonce: izK6JA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behaviour in ``audioop.c``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-18-08-47-40
.. gh-issue: 96821
.. nonce: Co2iOq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behaviour in ``_testcapimodule.c``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-19-02-40
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: cJmnst
.. section: Core and Builtins

When :exc:`ValueError` is raised if an integer is larger than the limit,
mention the :func:`sys.set_int_max_str_digits` function in the error
message. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-16-54-35
.. gh-issue: 96387
.. nonce: GRzewg
.. section: Core and Builtins

At Python exit, sometimes a thread holding the GIL can wait forever for a
thread (usually a daemon thread) which requested to drop the GIL, whereas
the thread already exited. To fix the race condition, the thread which
requested the GIL drop now resets its request before exiting. Issue
discovered and analyzed by Mingliang ZHAO. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-12-36-13
.. gh-issue: 96864
.. nonce: PLU3i8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible assertion failure, fatal error, or :exc:`SystemError` if a
line tracing event raises an exception while opcode tracing is enabled.

..

.. date: 2022-09-13-21-45-07
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: Oll4_5
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ``PyLong_FromString`` function was refactored to make it more
maintainable and extensible.

..

.. date: 2022-09-13-12-06-46
.. gh-issue: 96678
.. nonce: NqGFyb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behaviour in C code of null pointer arithmetic.

..

.. date: 2022-09-12-16-58-22
.. gh-issue: 96754
.. nonce: 0GRme5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure that all frame objects created are created from valid interpreter
frames. Prevents the possibility of invalid frames in backtraces and signal
handlers.

..

.. date: 2022-09-12-15-15-04
.. gh-issue: 90997
.. nonce: sZO8c9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the performance of reading and writing inline bytecode caches on
some platforms.

..

.. date: 2022-09-11-12-43-43
.. gh-issue: 96751
.. nonce: anRT6a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove dead code from ``CALL_FUNCTION_EX`` opcode.

..

.. date: 2022-09-11-00-37-50
.. gh-issue: 90751
.. nonce: VE8-zf
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`memoryview` now supports half-floats. Patch by Donghee Na and
Antoine Pitrou.

..

.. date: 2022-09-09-13-13-27
.. gh-issue: 96678
.. nonce: vMxi9F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix case of undefined behavior in ceval.c

..

.. date: 2022-09-08-20-58-10
.. gh-issue: 64373
.. nonce: AfCi36
.. section: Core and Builtins

Convert :mod:`!_functools` to argument clinic.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-13-38-37
.. gh-issue: 96641
.. nonce: wky0Fc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not expose ``KeyWrapper`` in :mod:`!_functools`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-12-02-11
.. gh-issue: 96636
.. nonce: YvN-K6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that tracing, ``sys.setrace()``, is turned on immediately. In
pre-release versions of 3.11, some tracing events might have been lost when
turning on tracing in a ``__del__`` method or interrupt.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-16-54-49
.. gh-issue: 96572
.. nonce: 8DRsaW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix use after free in trace refs build mode. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-16-22-13
.. gh-issue: 96611
.. nonce: 14wIX8
.. section: Core and Builtins

When loading a file with invalid UTF-8 inside a multi-line string, a correct
SyntaxError is emitted.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-14-26-36
.. gh-issue: 96612
.. nonce: P4ZbeY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure that incomplete frames do not show up in tracemalloc traces.

..

.. date: 2022-09-06-11-19-03
.. gh-issue: 90230
.. nonce: YOtzs5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix compiler warnings and test failures when building with
``--enable-pystats``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-19-20-44
.. gh-issue: 96587
.. nonce: bVxhX2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly raise ``SyntaxError`` on exception groups (:pep:`654`) on python
versions prior to 3.11

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-16-43-44
.. gh-issue: 96569
.. nonce: 9lmTCC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove two cases of undefined behavior, by adding NULL checks.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-15-07-25
.. gh-issue: 96582
.. nonce: HEsL5s
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible ``NULL`` pointer dereference in ``_PyThread_CurrentFrames``.
Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-09-56-32
.. gh-issue: 91079
.. nonce: H4-DdU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Separate Python recursion checking from C recursion checking which reduces
the chance of C stack overflow and allows the recursion limit to be
increased safely.

..

.. date: 2022-09-02-16-47-52
.. gh-issue: 93911
.. nonce: vF-GWe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that could prevent :opcode:`LOAD_ATTR` from specializing
properly when accessing properties.

..

.. date: 2022-08-31-18-46-13
.. gh-issue: 96348
.. nonce: xzCoTP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit a DeprecationWarning when :meth:`~generator.throw`,
:meth:`~coroutine.throw` or :meth:`~agen.athrow` are called with more than
one argument.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-13-06-58
.. gh-issue: 95196
.. nonce: eGRR4b
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disable incorrect pickling of the C implemented classmethod descriptors.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-00-37-21
.. gh-issue: 96364
.. nonce: c-IVyb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix text signatures of ``list.__getitem__`` and ``dict.__getitem__``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-28-10-51-19
.. gh-issue: 96352
.. nonce: jTLD2d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`AttributeError` missing ``name`` and ``obj`` attributes in
:meth:`object.__getattribute__`. Patch by Philip Georgi.

..

.. date: 2022-08-26-18-46-32
.. gh-issue: 93554
.. nonce: QEaCcK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the jump opcodes so that all conditional jumps are forward jumps.
Backward jumps are converted by the assembler into a conditional forward
jump whose target is the fallthrough block (and with a reversed condition),
followed by an unconditional backward jump. For example:

``POP_JUMP_IF_TRUE BACKWARD_TARGET`` becomes ``POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE NEXT_BLOCK;
JUMP BACKWARD_TARGET``.

All the directed conditional jump opcodes were removed:
``POP_JUMP_FORWARD_IF_TRUE``, ``POP_JUMP_BACKWARD_IF_TRUE``,
``POP_JUMP_FORWARD_IF_FALSE``, ``POP_JUMP_BACKWARD_IF_FALSE``,
``POP_JUMP_FORWARD_IF_NONE``, ``POP_JUMP_BACKWARD_IF_NONE``,
``POP_JUMP_FORWARD_IF_NOT_NONE``, ``POP_JUMP_BACKWARD_IF_NOT_NONE``.

The corresponding opcodes without direction are no longer
pseudo-instructions, and they implement the forward conditional jumps.

..

.. date: 2022-08-25-10-19-34
.. gh-issue: 96268
.. nonce: AbYrLB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Loading a file with invalid UTF-8 will now report the broken character at
the correct location.

..

.. date: 2022-08-24-14-30-26
.. gh-issue: 96237
.. nonce: msif5f
.. section: Core and Builtins

The internal field ``_PyInterpreterFrame.f_func`` is renamed to
``_PyInterpreterFrame.f_funcobj`` and may be any object. The ``f_globals``
and ``f_builtin`` fields may hold junk values.

It is safest to treat the ``_PyInterpreterFrame`` struct as opaque.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-21-33-28
.. gh-issue: 96187
.. nonce: W_6SRG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug that caused ``_PyCode_GetExtra`` to return garbage for negative
indexes. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-08-20-18-36-40
.. gh-issue: 96143
.. nonce: nh3GFM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new ``-X perf`` Python command line option as well as
:func:`sys.activate_stack_trampoline` and
:func:`sys.deactivate_stack_trampoline` function in the :mod:`sys` module
that allows to set/unset the interpreter in a way that the Linux ``perf``
profiler can detect Python calls. The new
:func:`sys.is_stack_trampoline_active` function allows to query the state of
the perf trampoline. Design by Pablo Galindo. Patch by Pablo Galindo and
Christian Heimes with contributions from Gregory P. Smith [Google] and Mark
Shannon.

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-06-51-17
.. gh-issue: 96071
.. nonce: mVgPAo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a deadlock in :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` when allocating new thread
state. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-18-13-47-59
.. gh-issue: 96046
.. nonce: 5Hqbka
.. section: Core and Builtins

:c:func:`PyType_Ready` now initializes ``ht_cached_keys`` and performs
additional checks to ensure that type objects are properly configured. This
avoids crashes in 3rd party packages that don't use regular API to create
new types.

..

.. date: 2022-08-15-21-08-11
.. gh-issue: 96005
.. nonce: 6eoc8k
.. section: Core and Builtins

On WASI :const:`~errno.ENOTCAPABLE` is now mapped to :exc:`PermissionError`.
The :mod:`errno` modules exposes the new error number. ``getpath.py`` now
ignores :exc:`PermissionError` when it cannot open landmark files
``pybuilddir.txt`` and ``pyenv.cfg``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-15-20-52-41
.. gh-issue: 93678
.. nonce: X7GuIJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added test a harness for direct unit tests of the compiler's optimization
stage. The ``_testinternalcapi.optimize_cfg()`` function runs the optimiser
on a sequence of instructions. The ``CfgOptimizationTestCase`` class in
``test.support`` has utilities for invoking the optimizer and checking the
output.

..

.. date: 2022-08-15-12-41-14
.. gh-issue: 95245
.. nonce: N4gOUV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reduces the size of a "simple" Python object from 8 to 6 words by moving the
weakreflist pointer into the pre-header directly before the object's
dict/values pointer.

..

.. date: 2022-08-15-11-58-05
.. gh-issue: 90997
.. nonce: bWwV8Q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compile virtual :keyword:`try`/:keyword:`except` blocks to handle exceptions
raised during :meth:`~generator.close` or :meth:`~generator.throw` calls
through a suspended frame.

..

.. date: 2022-08-14-10-04-44
.. gh-issue: 95977
.. nonce: gCTZb9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimized calling :meth:`~object.__get__` with vectorcall. Patch by Kumar
Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-12-18-13-49
.. gh-issue: 91210
.. nonce: AWMSLj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message when a parameter without a default value follows one
with a default value, and show the same message, even when the
non-default/default sequence is preceded by positional-only parameters.

..

.. date: 2022-08-12-13-04-25
.. gh-issue: 95922
.. nonce: YNCtyX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bug where the compiler's ``eliminate_empty_basic_blocks`` function
ignores the last block of the code unit.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-11-01-56
.. gh-issue: 95818
.. nonce: iClLdl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Skip over incomplete frames in :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetFrame`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-09-19-55
.. gh-issue: 95876
.. nonce: YpQfoV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix format string in ``_PyPegen_raise_error_known_location`` that can lead
to memory corruption on some 64bit systems. The function was building a
tuple with ``i`` (int) instead of ``n`` (Py_ssize_t) for Py_ssize_t
arguments.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-18-46-54
.. gh-issue: 95605
.. nonce: FbpCoG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix misleading contents of error message when converting an all-whitespace
string to :class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-13-23-12
.. gh-issue: 95150
.. nonce: 67FXVo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update code object hashing and equality to consider all debugging and
exception handling tables. This fixes an issue where certain non-identical
code objects could be "deduplicated" during compilation.

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-03-22-58
.. gh-issue: 91146
.. nonce: Y2Hziy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reduce allocation size of :class:`list` from :meth:`str.split` and
:meth:`str.rsplit`. Patch by Donghee Na and Inada Naoki.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-19-07-06
.. gh-issue: 87092
.. nonce: 73IPS1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Create a 'jump target label' abstraction in the compiler so that the
compiler's codegen stage does not work directly with basic blocks. This
prepares the code for changes to the underlying CFG generation mechanism.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-08-33-31
.. gh-issue: 95355
.. nonce: yN4XVk
.. section: Core and Builtins

``_PyPegen_Parser_New`` now properly detects token memory allocation errors.
Patch by Honglin Zhu.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-14-21-57
.. gh-issue: 90081
.. nonce: HVAS5x
.. section: Core and Builtins

Run Python code in tracer/profiler function at full speed. Fixes slowdown in
earlier versions of 3.11.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-14-05-07
.. gh-issue: 95324
.. nonce: 28Q5u7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit a warning in debug mode if an object does not call
:c:func:`PyObject_GC_UnTrack` before deallocation. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-12-59-03
.. gh-issue: 95245
.. nonce: GHWczn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Merge managed dict and values pointer into a single tagged pointer to save
one word in the pre-header.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-09-31-12
.. gh-issue: 93678
.. nonce: W8vvgT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add cfg_builder struct and refactor the relevant code so that a cfg can be
constructed without an instance of the compiler struct.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-00-27-47
.. gh-issue: 95185
.. nonce: ghYTZx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevented crashes in the AST constructor when compiling some absurdly long
expressions like ``"+0"*1000000``. :exc:`RecursionError` is now raised
instead. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-19-16-25
.. gh-issue: 93351
.. nonce: 0Jyvu-
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`ast.AST` node positions are now validated when provided to
:func:`compile` and other related functions. If invalid positions are
detected, a :exc:`ValueError` will be raised.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-12-53-34
.. gh-issue: 94438
.. nonce: hNqACc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that caused extended opcode arguments and some conditional pops
to be ignored when calculating valid jump targets for assignments to the
``f_lineno`` attribute of frame objects. In some cases, this could cause
inconsistent internal state, resulting in a hard crash of the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-19-19-20
.. gh-issue: 95060
.. nonce: 4xdT1f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Undocumented ``PyCode_Addr2Location`` function now properly returns when
``addrq`` argument is less than zero.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-17-54-52
.. gh-issue: 95113
.. nonce: NnSLpT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace all ``EXTENDED_ARG_QUICK`` instructions with basic
:opcode:`EXTENDED_ARG` instructions in unquickened code. Consumers of
non-adaptive bytecode should be able to handle extended arguments the same
way they were handled in CPython 3.10 and older.

..

.. date: 2022-07-20-13-46-01
.. gh-issue: 91409
.. nonce: dhL8Zo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect source location info caused by certain optimizations in the
bytecode compiler.

..

.. date: 2022-07-20-09-04-55
.. gh-issue: 95023
.. nonce: bs-xd7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement :func:`os.setns` and  :func:`os.unshare` for Linux. Patch by Noam
Cohen.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-16-30-59
.. gh-issue: 94036
.. nonce: _6Utkm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect source location info for some multi-line attribute accesses
and method calls.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-09-41-55
.. gh-issue: 94938
.. nonce: xYBlM7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error detection in some builtin functions when keyword argument name is
an instance of a str subclass with overloaded ``__eq__`` and ``__hash__``.
Previously it could cause SystemError or other undesired behavior.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-04-34-56
.. gh-issue: 94996
.. nonce: dV564A
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse function definitions with
positional-only params when passed ``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 8)``.
Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-14-19-21
.. gh-issue: 94739
.. nonce: NQJQi7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow jumping within, out of, and across exception handlers in the debugger.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-05-10-29
.. gh-issue: 94949
.. nonce: OsZ7_s
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse parenthesized context managers when
passed ``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 9)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-04-48-34
.. gh-issue: 94947
.. nonce: df9gUw
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`ast.parse` will no longer parse assignment expressions when passed
``feature_version`` less than ``(3, 8)``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-15-54-29
.. gh-issue: 91256
.. nonce: z7i7Q5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensures the program name is known for help text during interpreter startup.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-08-14-17
.. gh-issue: 94869
.. nonce: eRwMsX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the column offsets for some expressions in multi-line f-strings
:mod:`ast` nodes. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-22-47-44
.. gh-issue: 94893
.. nonce: YiJYcW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where frame object manipulations could corrupt inline bytecode
caches.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-22-16-08
.. gh-issue: 94822
.. nonce: zRRzBN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where lookups of metaclass descriptors may be ignored when an
identically-named attribute also exists on the class itself.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-16-15-04
.. gh-issue: 91153
.. nonce: HiBmtt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where a :class:`bytearray` item assignment could crash if it's
resized by the new value's :meth:`__index__` method.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-10-07-53
.. gh-issue: 90699
.. nonce: x3aG9m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference counting bug in :meth:`bool.__repr__`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-16-44-11
.. gh-issue: 94694
.. nonce: VkL2CM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that could cause code with multi-line method lookups to have
misleading or incorrect column offset information. In some cases (when
compiling a hand-built AST) this could have resulted in a hard crash of the
interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-11-44-45
.. gh-issue: 93252
.. nonce: i2358c
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that caused internal frames to outlive failed Python function
calls, possibly resulting in memory leaks or hard interpreter crashes.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-21-13-25
.. gh-issue: 94215
.. nonce: _Sv9Ms
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where exceptions raised by line-tracing events would cause
frames to be left in an invalid state, possibly resulting in a hard crash of
the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-14-02-26
.. gh-issue: 92228
.. nonce: 44Cbly
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disable the compiler's inline-small-exit-blocks optimization for exit blocks
that are associated with source code lines. This fixes a bug where the
debugger cannot tell where an exception handler ends and the following code
block begins.

..

.. date: 2022-07-01-20-00-19
.. gh-issue: 94485
.. nonce: mo5st7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Line number of a module's ``RESUME`` instruction is set to 0 as specified in
:pep:`626`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-30-15-07-26
.. gh-issue: 94438
.. nonce: btzHSk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Account for instructions that can push NULL to the stack when setting line
number in a frame. Prevents some (unlikely) crashes.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-22-18-36
.. gh-issue: 91719
.. nonce: 3APYYI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reload ``opcode`` when raising ``unknown opcode error`` in the interpreter
main loop, for C compilers to generate dispatching code independently.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-15-45-04
.. gh-issue: 94329
.. nonce: olUQyk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compile and run code with unpacking of extremely large sequences (1000s of
elements). Such code failed to compile. It now compiles and runs correctly.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-14-20-36
.. gh-issue: 94360
.. nonce: DiEnen
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a tokenizer crash when reading encoded files with syntax errors from
``stdin`` with non utf-8 encoded text. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-12-41-17
.. gh-issue: 88116
.. nonce: A7fEl_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue when reading line numbers from code objects if the encoded line
numbers are close to ``INT_MIN``. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-10-08-06
.. gh-issue: 94262
.. nonce: m-HWUZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't create frame objects for incomplete frames. Prevents the creation of
generators and closures from being observable to Python and C extensions,
restoring the behavior of 3.10 and earlier.

..

.. date: 2022-06-26-14-37-03
.. gh-issue: 94192
.. nonce: ab7tn7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error for dictionary literals with invalid expression as value.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-10-19-43
.. gh-issue: 87995
.. nonce: aMDHnp
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`types.MappingProxyType` instances are now hashable if the underlying
mapping is hashable.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-14-06-20
.. gh-issue: 93883
.. nonce: 8jVQQ4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revise the display strategy of traceback enhanced error locations.  The
indicators are only shown when the location doesn't span the whole line.

..

.. date: 2022-06-23-12-10-39
.. gh-issue: 94163
.. nonce: SqAfQq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :opcode:`BINARY_SLICE` and :opcode:`STORE_SLICE` instructions for more
efficient handling and better specialization of slicing operations, where
the slice is explicit in the source code.

..

.. date: 2022-06-20-13-48-57
.. gh-issue: 94021
.. nonce: o78q3G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix unreachable code warning in ``Python/specialize.c``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-18-17-00-33
.. gh-issue: 93911
.. nonce: y286of
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialize ``LOAD_ATTR`` for objects with custom ``__getattribute__``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-16-30-24
.. gh-issue: 93955
.. nonce: LmiAe9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve performance of attribute lookups on objects with custom
``__getattribute__`` and ``__getattr__``. Patch by Ken Jin.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-16-53-22
.. gh-issue: 93911
.. nonce: RDwIiK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialize ``LOAD_ATTR`` for ``property()`` attributes.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-16-45-53
.. gh-issue: 93678
.. nonce: 1I_ZT3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Refactor compiler optimisation code so that it no longer needs the ``struct
assembler`` and ``struct compiler`` passed around. Instead, each function
takes the CFG and other data that it actually needs. This will make it
possible to test this code directly.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-11-16-13
.. gh-issue: 93841
.. nonce: 06zqX3
.. section: Core and Builtins

When built with ``-enable-pystats``, ``sys._stats_on()``,
``sys._stats_off()``, ``sys._stats_clear()`` and ``sys._stats_dump()``
functions have been added to enable gathering stats for parts of programs.

..

.. date: 2022-06-13-13-55-34
.. gh-issue: 93516
.. nonce: HILrDl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Store offset of first traceable instruction in code object to avoid having
to recompute it for each instruction when tracing.

..

.. date: 2022-06-13-10-48-09
.. gh-issue: 93516
.. nonce: yJSait
.. section: Core and Builtins

Lazily create a table mapping bytecode offsets to line numbers to speed up
calculation of line numbers when tracing.

..

.. date: 2022-06-12-19-31-56
.. gh-issue: 89828
.. nonce: bq02M7
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`types.GenericAlias` no longer relays the ``__class__`` attribute.
For example, ``isinstance(list[int], type)`` no longer returns ``True``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-16-57-35
.. gh-issue: 93678
.. nonce: 1WBnHt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Refactor the compiler to reduce boilerplate and repetition.

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-12-03-17
.. gh-issue: 93671
.. nonce: idkQqG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some exponential backtrace case happening with deeply nested sequence
patterns in match statements. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-10-31-18
.. gh-issue: 93662
.. nonce: -7RSC1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure that the end column offsets are correct in multi-line method
calls. Previously, the end column could precede the column offset.

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-19-19-02
.. gh-issue: 93461
.. nonce: 5DqP1e
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`importlib.invalidate_caches` now drops entries from
:data:`sys.path_importer_cache` with a relative path as name. This solves a
caching issue when a process changes its current working directory.

``FileFinder`` no longer inserts a dot in the path, e.g. ``/egg/./spam`` is
now ``/egg/spam``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-09-08-29
.. gh-issue: 93621
.. nonce: -_Pn1d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change order of bytecode instructions emitted for :keyword:`with` and
:keyword:`async with` to reduce the number of entries in the exception
table.

..

.. date: 2022-06-06-14-28-24
.. gh-issue: 93533
.. nonce: lnC0CC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reduce the size of the inline cache for ``LOAD_METHOD`` by 2 bytes.

..

.. date: 2022-06-02-23-00-08
.. gh-issue: 93444
.. nonce: m63DIs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Removed redundant fields from the compiler's basicblock struct:
``b_nofallthrough``, ``b_exit``, ``b_return``. They can be easily calculated
from the opcode of the last instruction of the block.

..

.. date: 2022-06-02-08-28-55
.. gh-issue: 93429
.. nonce: DZTWHx
.. section: Core and Builtins

``LOAD_METHOD`` instruction has been removed. It was merged back into
``LOAD_ATTR``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-01-17-47-40
.. gh-issue: 93418
.. nonce: 24dJuc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed an assert where an f-string has an equal sign '=' following an
expression, but there's no trailing brace. For example, f"{i=".

..

.. date: 2022-05-31-16-36-30
.. gh-issue: 93382
.. nonce: Jf6gAj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Cache the result of :c:func:`PyCode_GetCode` function to restore the *O*\ (1)
lookup of the :attr:`~types.CodeType.co_code` attribute.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-19-00-38
.. gh-issue: 93359
.. nonce: zXV3A0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that custom :mod:`ast` nodes without explicit end positions can be
compiled. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-15-51-11
.. gh-issue: 93356
.. nonce: l5wnzW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Code for exception handlers is emitted at the end of the code unit's
bytecode. This avoids one jump when no exception is raised.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-15-35-42
.. gh-issue: 93354
.. nonce: RZk8gs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use exponential backoff for specialization counters in the interpreter. Can
reduce the number of failed specializations significantly and avoid slowdown
for those parts of a program that are not suitable for specialization.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-14-50-03
.. gh-issue: 93283
.. nonce: XDO2ZQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message for invalid syntax of conversion character in f-string
expressions.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-10-22-46
.. gh-issue: 93345
.. nonce: gi1A4L
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in substitution of a ``TypeVar`` in nested generic alias after
``TypeVarTuple``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-21-56-25
.. gh-issue: 93223
.. nonce: gTOGVZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a bytecode instruction jumps to an unconditional jump instruction, the
first instruction can often be optimized to target the unconditional jump's
target directly. For tracing reasons, this would previously only occur if
both instructions have the same line number. This also now occurs if the
unconditional jump is artificial, i.e., if it has no associated line number.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-12-30-12
.. gh-issue: 84694
.. nonce: 5sjy2w
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ``--experimental-isolated-subinterpreters`` configure option and
``EXPERIMENTAL_ISOLATED_SUBINTERPRETERS`` macro have been removed.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-04-07-22
.. gh-issue: 91924
.. nonce: -UyO4q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``__lltrace__`` debug feature if the stdout encoding is not UTF-8. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-24-14-35-48
.. gh-issue: 93040
.. nonce: 9X6Ofu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Wraps unused parameters in ``Objects/obmalloc.c`` with ``Py_UNUSED``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-23-18-36-07
.. gh-issue: 93143
.. nonce: X1Yqxm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid ``NULL`` checks for uninitialized local variables by determining at
compile time which variables must be initialized.

..

.. date: 2022-05-22-02-37-50
.. gh-issue: 93061
.. nonce: r70Imp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Backward jumps after ``async for`` loops are no longer given dubious line
numbers.

..

.. date: 2022-05-21-23-21-37
.. gh-issue: 93065
.. nonce: 5I18WC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix contextvars HAMT implementation to handle iteration over deep trees.

The bug was discovered and fixed by Eli Libman. See
`MagicStack/immutables#84
<https://github.com/MagicStack/immutables/issues/84>`_ for more details.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-13-32-24
.. gh-issue: 93012
.. nonce: e9B-pv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added the new function :c:func:`PyType_FromMetaclass`, which generalizes the
existing :c:func:`PyType_FromModuleAndSpec` using an additional metaclass
argument. This is useful for language binding tools, where it can be used to
intercept type-related operations like subclassing or static attribute
access by specifying a metaclass with custom slots.

Importantly, :c:func:`PyType_FromMetaclass` is available in the Limited API,
which provides a path towards migrating more binding tools onto the Stable
ABI.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-09-25-34
.. gh-issue: 93021
.. nonce: k3Aji2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the :attr:`__text_signature__` for :meth:`__get__` methods implemented
in C. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-15-29-53
.. gh-issue: 89914
.. nonce: 8bAffH
.. section: Core and Builtins

The operand of the ``YIELD_VALUE`` instruction is set to the stack depth.
This is done to help frame handling on ``yield`` and may assist debuggers.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-13-25-50
.. gh-issue: 92955
.. nonce: kmNV33
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in code object's lines and positions iterators as they were
not finalized at exit. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-18-34-45
.. gh-issue: 92930
.. nonce: kpYPOb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in ``_pickle.c`` from mutating collections during
``__reduce__`` or ``persistent_id``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-12-55-35
.. gh-issue: 90690
.. nonce: TKuoTa
.. section: Core and Builtins

The PRECALL instruction has been removed. It offered only a small advantage
for specialization and is not needed in the vast majority of cases.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-08-32-33
.. gh-issue: 92914
.. nonce: tJUeTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Always round the allocated size for lists up to the nearest even number.

..

.. date: 2022-05-17-20-41-43
.. gh-issue: 92858
.. nonce: eIXJTn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message for some suites with syntax error before ':'

..

.. date: 2022-05-15-15-25-05
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: MoPHYW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Decrease default recursion limit on WASI to address limited call stack size.

..

.. date: 2022-05-14-13-22-11
.. gh-issue: 92804
.. nonce: rAqpI2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in ``memoryview`` iterator as it was not finalized at exit.
Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-13-12-36-10
.. gh-issue: 92777
.. nonce: Odo4vP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialize ``LOAD_METHOD`` for objects with lazy dictionaries. Patch by Ken
Jin.

..

.. date: 2022-05-13-00-57-18
.. gh-issue: 92658
.. nonce: YdhFE2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add support for connecting and binding to Hyper-V sockets on Windows Hyper-V
hosts and guests.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-13-23-19
.. gh-issue: 92236
.. nonce: sDRzUe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove spurious "LINE" event when starting a generator or coroutine, visible
tracing functions implemented in C.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-09-16-54
.. gh-issue: 91102
.. nonce: lenv9h
.. section: Core and Builtins

:meth:`!_warnings.warn_explicit` is ported to Argument Clinic.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-11-34-35
.. gh-issue: 92619
.. nonce: u0V0lY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the compiler duplicate an exit block only if none of its instructions
have a lineno (previously only the first instruction in the block was
checked, leading to unnecessarily duplicated blocks).

..

.. date: 2022-05-08-19-43-31
.. gh-issue: 88750
.. nonce: 1BjJg-
.. section: Core and Builtins

The deprecated debug build only ``PYTHONTHREADDEBUG`` environment variable
no longer does anything.

..

.. date: 2022-05-03-20-12-18
.. gh-issue: 92261
.. nonce: aigLnb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix hang when trying to iterate over a ``typing.Union``.

..

.. date: 2022-04-24-02-22-10
.. gh-issue: 91432
.. nonce: YPJAK6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialized the :opcode:`FOR_ITER` opcode using the PEP 659 machinery

..

.. date: 2022-04-16-15-37-55
.. gh-issue: 91399
.. nonce: trLbK6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Removed duplicate '{0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}' entry in 'Objects/unicodetype_db.h'.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-22-12-53
.. gh-issue: 91578
.. nonce: rDOtyK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Updates the error message for abstract class.

..

.. bpo: 47091
.. date: 2022-03-22-13-12-27
.. nonce: tJcy-P
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve performance of repetition of :class:`list` and :class:`tuple` by
using ``memcpy`` to copy data and performing the reference increments in one
step.

..

.. bpo: 46142
.. date: 2022-01-02-14-53-59
.. nonce: WayjgT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``--help`` output shorter by moving some info to the new ``--help-env``
and ``--help-xoptions`` command-line options. Also add ``--help-all`` option
to print complete usage.

..

.. bpo: 42316
.. date: 2020-11-15-02-08-43
.. nonce: LqdkWK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Document some places where an assignment expression needs parentheses.

..

.. date: 2022-10-23-18-30-39
.. gh-issue: 89237
.. nonce: kBui30
.. section: Library

Fix hang on Windows in ``subprocess.wait_closed()`` in :mod:`asyncio` with
:class:`~asyncio.ProactorEventLoop`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-09-29-12
.. gh-issue: 97928
.. nonce: xj3im7
.. section: Library

:meth:`tkinter.Text.count` raises now an exception for options starting with
"-" instead of silently ignoring them.

..

.. date: 2022-10-18-15-41-37
.. gh-issue: 98393
.. nonce: vhPu4L
.. section: Library

The :mod:`os` module no longer accepts bytes-like paths, like
:class:`bytearray` and :class:`memoryview` types: only the exact
:class:`bytes` type is accepted for bytes strings. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-10-17-12-49-02
.. gh-issue: 98363
.. nonce: aFmSP-
.. section: Library

Added itertools.batched() to batch data into lists of a given length with
the last list possibly being shorter than the others.

..

.. date: 2022-10-16-15-31-50
.. gh-issue: 98331
.. nonce: Y5kPOX
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copies of pip and setuptools to versions 22.3 and 65.5.0
respectively.

..

.. date: 2022-10-16-06-18-59
.. gh-issue: 98307
.. nonce: b2_CDu
.. section: Library

A :meth:`~logging.handlers.SysLogHandler.createSocket` method was added to
:class:`~logging.handlers.SysLogHandler`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-14-19-57-37
.. gh-issue: 96035
.. nonce: 0xcX-p
.. section: Library

Fix bug in :func:`urllib.parse.urlparse` that causes certain port numbers
containing whitespace, underscores, plus and minus signs, or non-ASCII
digits to be incorrectly accepted.

..

.. date: 2022-10-14-12-29-05
.. gh-issue: 98257
.. nonce: aMSMs2
.. section: Library

Make :func:`sys.setprofile` and :func:`sys.settrace` functions reentrant.
They can no long fail with: ``RuntimeError("Cannot install a trace function
while another trace function is being installed")``. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-10-14-11-46-31
.. gh-issue: 98251
.. nonce: Uxc9al
.. section: Library

Allow :mod:`venv` to pass along :envvar:`!PYTHON*` variables to ``ensurepip``
and ``pip`` when they do not impact path resolution

..

.. date: 2022-10-12-11-20-54
.. gh-issue: 94597
.. nonce: GYJZlb
.. section: Library

Deprecated :meth:`asyncio.AbstractEventLoopPolicy.get_child_watcher` and
:meth:`asyncio.AbstractEventLoopPolicy.set_child_watcher` methods to be
removed in Python 3.14. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-10-12-10-00-40
.. gh-issue: 98178
.. nonce: hspH51
.. section: Library

On macOS, fix a crash in :func:`syslog.syslog` in multi-threaded
applications. On macOS, the libc ``syslog()`` function is not thread-safe,
so :func:`syslog.syslog` no longer releases the GIL to call it. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-10-10-09-52-21
.. gh-issue: 44098
.. nonce: okcqJt
.. section: Library

Release the GIL when creating :class:`mmap.mmap` objects on Unix.

..

.. date: 2022-10-09-12-12-38
.. gh-issue: 87730
.. nonce: ClgP3f
.. section: Library

Wrap network errors consistently in urllib FTP support, so the test suite
doesn't fail when a network is available but the public internet is not
reachable.

..

.. date: 2022-10-08-06-59-46
.. gh-issue: 94597
.. nonce: TsS0oT
.. section: Library

The child watcher classes :class:`~asyncio.MultiLoopChildWatcher`,
:class:`~asyncio.FastChildWatcher` and :class:`~asyncio.SafeChildWatcher`
are deprecated and will be removed in Python 3.14. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-10-07-09-52-37
.. gh-issue: 98023
.. nonce: aliEcl
.. section: Library

Change default child watcher to :class:`~asyncio.PidfdChildWatcher` on Linux
systems which supports it. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-23-42-00
.. gh-issue: 90985
.. nonce: s280JY
.. section: Library

Earlier in 3.11 we deprecated ``asyncio.Task.cancel("message")``. We
realized we were too harsh, and have undeprecated it.

..

.. date: 2022-10-06-17-59-22
.. gh-issue: 65961
.. nonce: SXlQnI
.. section: Library

Do not rely solely on ``__cached__`` on modules; code will also support
``__spec__.cached``.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-20-52-17
.. gh-issue: 97646
.. nonce: Q4fVww
.. section: Library

Replace deprecated ``application/javascript`` with ``text/javascript`` in
:mod:`mimetypes`. See :rfc:`9239`. Patch by Noam Cohen.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-16-10-24
.. gh-issue: 97930
.. nonce: NPSrzE
.. section: Library

Apply changes from importlib_resources 5.8 and 5.9: ``Traversable.joinpath``
provides a concrete implementation. ``as_file`` now supports directories of
resources.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-11-40-02
.. gh-issue: 97850
.. nonce: NzdREm
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated :func:`!importlib.util.set_loader` and
:func:`!importlib.util.module_for_loader` from :mod:`importlib.util`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-21-21-41
.. gh-issue: 97837
.. nonce: 19q-eg
.. section: Library

Change deprecate warning message in :mod:`unittest` from

``It is deprecated to return a value!=None``

to

``It is deprecated to return a value that is not None from a test case``

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-07-55-19
.. gh-issue: 97825
.. nonce: mNdv1l
.. section: Library

Fixes :exc:`AttributeError` when :meth:`subprocess.check_output` is used
with argument ``input=None`` and either of the arguments *encoding* or
*errors* are used.

..

.. date: 2022-10-04-00-43-43
.. gh-issue: 97008
.. nonce: 3rjtt6
.. section: Library

:exc:`NameError` and :exc:`AttributeError` spelling suggestions provided
since :gh:`82711` are now also emitted by the pure Python :mod:`traceback`
module. Tests for those suggestions now exercise both implementations to
ensure they are equivalent. Patch by Carl Friedrich Bolz-Tereick and Łukasz
Langa.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-14-42-13
.. gh-issue: 97799
.. nonce: Y1iJvf
.. section: Library

:mod:`dataclass` now uses :func:`inspect.get_annotations` to examine the
annotations on class objects.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-13-25-19
.. gh-issue: 97781
.. nonce: gCLLef
.. section: Library

Removed deprecated interfaces in ``importlib.metadata`` (entry points
accessed as dictionary, implicit dictionary construction of sequence of
``EntryPoint`` objects, mutablility of ``EntryPoints`` result, access of
entry point by index). ``entry_points`` now has a simpler, more
straightforward API (returning ``EntryPoints``).

..

.. date: 2022-09-30-15-56-20
.. gh-issue: 96827
.. nonce: lzy1iw
.. section: Library

Avoid spurious tracebacks from :mod:`asyncio` when default executor cleanup
is delayed until after the event loop is closed (e.g. as the result of a
keyboard interrupt).

..

.. date: 2022-09-30-09-22-37
.. gh-issue: 95534
.. nonce: ndEfPj
.. section: Library

:meth:`gzip.GzipFile.read` reads 10% faster.

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-23-22-24
.. gh-issue: 97592
.. nonce: tpJg_J
.. section: Library

Avoid a crash in the C version of
:meth:`asyncio.Future.remove_done_callback` when an evil argument is passed.

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-08-15-55
.. gh-issue: 97639
.. nonce: JSjWYW
.. section: Library

Remove ``tokenize.NL`` check from :mod:`tabnanny`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-25-23-24-52
.. gh-issue: 97545
.. nonce: HZLSNt
.. section: Library

Make Semaphore run faster.

..

.. date: 2022-09-25-20-42-33
.. gh-issue: 73588
.. nonce: uVtjEA
.. section: Library

Fix generation of the default name of :class:`tkinter.Checkbutton`.
Previously, checkbuttons in different parent widgets could have the same
short name and share the same state if arguments "name" and "variable" are
not specified. Now they are globally unique.

..

.. date: 2022-09-24-18-56-23
.. gh-issue: 96865
.. nonce: o9WUkW
.. section: Library

fix Flag to use boundary CONFORM

This restores previous Flag behavior of allowing flags with non-sequential
values to be combined; e.g.

class Skip(Flag):         TWO = 2         EIGHT = 8

Skip.TWO | Skip.EIGHT -> <Skip.TWO|EIGHT: 10>

..

.. date: 2022-09-22-14-35-02
.. gh-issue: 97005
.. nonce: yf21Q7
.. section: Library

Update bundled libexpat to 2.4.9

..

.. date: 2022-09-22-11-50-29
.. gh-issue: 85760
.. nonce: DETTPd
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :mod:`asyncio` where
:meth:`~asyncio.SubprocessProtocol.process_exited` called before the
:meth:`~asyncio.SubprocessProtocol.pipe_data_received` leading to
inconsistent output. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-09-18-04-51-30
.. gh-issue: 96704
.. nonce: DmamRX
.. section: Library

Pass the correct ``contextvars.Context`` when a ``asyncio`` exception
handler is called on behalf of a task or callback handle. This adds a new
``Task`` method, ``get_context``, and also a new ``Handle`` method with the
same name. If this method is not found on a task object (perhaps because it
is a third-party library that does not yet provide this method), the context
prevailing at the time the exception handler is called is used.

..

.. date: 2022-09-17-13-15-10
.. gh-issue: 96819
.. nonce: 6RfqM7
.. section: Library

Fixed check in :mod:`multiprocessing.resource_tracker` that guarantees that
the length of a write to a pipe is not greater than ``PIPE_BUF``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-07-53-29
.. gh-issue: 95865
.. nonce: oHjX0A
.. section: Library

Reduce :func:`urllib.parse.quote_from_bytes` memory use on large values.

Contributed by Dennis Sweeney.

..

.. date: 2022-09-15-00-37-33
.. gh-issue: 96741
.. nonce: 4b6czN
.. section: Library

Corrected type annotation for dataclass attribute
``pstats.FunctionProfile.ncalls`` to be ``str``.

..

.. date: 2022-09-13-15-12-31
.. gh-issue: 96734
.. nonce: G08vjz
.. section: Library

Update :mod:`unicodedata` database to Unicode 15.0.0.

..

.. date: 2022-09-10-16-46-16
.. gh-issue: 96735
.. nonce: 0YzJuG
.. section: Library

Fix undefined behaviour in :func:`struct.unpack`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-08-20-12-48
.. gh-issue: 46412
.. nonce: r_cfTh
.. section: Library

Improve performance of ``bool(db)`` for large ndb/gdb databases. Previously
this would call ``len(db)`` which would iterate over all keys -- the answer
(empty or not) is known after the first key.

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-22-49-37
.. gh-issue: 96652
.. nonce: YqOKxI
.. section: Library

Fix the faulthandler implementation of ``faulthandler.register(signal,
chain=True)`` if the ``sigaction()`` function is not available: don't call
the previous signal handler if it's NULL. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-04-12-32-52
.. gh-issue: 68163
.. nonce: h6TJCc
.. section: Library

Correct conversion of :class:`numbers.Rational`'s to :class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-03-18-39-05
.. gh-issue: 96538
.. nonce: W156-D
.. section: Library

Speed up ``bisect.bisect()`` functions by taking advantage of
type-stability.

..

.. date: 2022-09-01-13-54-38
.. gh-issue: 96465
.. nonce: 0IJmrH
.. section: Library

Fraction hashes are now cached.

..

.. date: 2022-08-31-11-10-21
.. gh-issue: 96079
.. nonce: uqrXdJ
.. section: Library

In :mod:`typing`, fix missing field ``name`` and incorrect ``__module__`` in
_AnnotatedAlias.

..

.. date: 2022-08-30-12-32-00
.. gh-issue: 96415
.. nonce: 6W7ORH
.. section: Library

Remove ``types._cell_factory`` from module namespace.

..

.. date: 2022-08-30-11-46-36
.. gh-issue: 95987
.. nonce: CV7_u4
.. section: Library

Fix ``repr`` of ``Any`` subclasses.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-16-54-36
.. gh-issue: 96388
.. nonce: dCpJcu
.. section: Library

Work around missing socket functions in :class:`~socket.socket`'s
``__repr__``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-15-28-39
.. gh-issue: 96385
.. nonce: uLRTsf
.. section: Library

Fix ``TypeVarTuple.__typing_prepare_subst__``. ``TypeError`` was not raised
when using more than one ``TypeVarTuple``, like ``[*T, *V]`` in type alias
substitutions.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-12-49-30
.. gh-issue: 96142
.. nonce: PdCMez
.. section: Library

Add ``match_args``, ``kw_only``, ``slots``, and ``weakref_slot`` to
``_DataclassParams``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-12-35-28
.. gh-issue: 96073
.. nonce: WaGstf
.. section: Library

In :mod:`inspect`, fix overeager replacement of "``typing.``" in formatting
annotations.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-07-04-03
.. gh-issue: 89258
.. nonce: ri7ncj
.. section: Library

Added a :meth:`~logging.Logger.getChildren` method to
:class:`logging.Logger`, to get the immediate child loggers of a logger.

..

.. date: 2022-08-27-23-16-09
.. gh-issue: 96346
.. nonce: jJX14I
.. section: Library

Use double caching for compiled RE patterns.

..

.. date: 2022-08-27-21-26-52
.. gh-issue: 96349
.. nonce: XyYLlO
.. section: Library

Fixed a minor performance regression in :func:`threading.Event.__init__`

..

.. date: 2022-08-27-14-38-49
.. gh-issue: 90467
.. nonce: VOOB0p
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.streams.StreamReaderProtocol` to keep a strong reference
to the created task, so that it's not garbage collected

..

.. date: 2022-08-23-13-30-30
.. gh-issue: 96172
.. nonce: 7WTHer
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in ``unicodedata``: ``east_asian_width`` used to return the wrong
value for unassigned characters; and for yet unassigned, but reserved
characters.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-18-42-17
.. gh-issue: 96159
.. nonce: 3bFU39
.. section: Library

Fix a performance regression in logging TimedRotatingFileHandler. Only check
for special files when the rollover time has passed.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-13-54-20
.. gh-issue: 96175
.. nonce: bH7zGU
.. section: Library

Fix unused ``localName`` parameter in the ``Attr`` class in
:mod:`xml.dom.minidom`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-20-12-56-15
.. gh-issue: 96145
.. nonce: 8ah3pE
.. section: Library

Add AttrDict to JSON module for use with object_hook.

..

.. date: 2022-08-20-10-31-01
.. gh-issue: 96052
.. nonce: a6FhaD
.. section: Library

Fix handling compiler warnings (SyntaxWarning and DeprecationWarning) in
:func:`codeop.compile_command` when checking for incomplete input.
Previously it emitted warnings and raised a SyntaxError. Now it always
returns ``None`` for incomplete input without emitting any warnings.

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-18-21-01
.. gh-issue: 96125
.. nonce: ODcF1Y
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect condition that causes ``sys.thread_info.name`` to be wrong on
pthread platforms.

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-10-19-32
.. gh-issue: 96019
.. nonce: b7uAVP
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in the ``makeunicodedata.py`` script leading to about 13 KiB of
space saving in the ``unicodedata`` module, specifically the character
decomposition data.

..

.. date: 2022-08-18-14-53-53
.. gh-issue: 95463
.. nonce: GpP05c
.. section: Library

Remove an incompatible change from :issue:`28080` that caused a regression
that ignored the utf8 in ``ZipInfo.flag_bits``. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-08-14-18-59-54
.. gh-issue: 69142
.. nonce: 6is5Pq
.. section: Library

Add ``%:z`` strftime format code (generates tzoffset with colons as
separator), see :ref:`strftime-strptime-behavior`.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-18-52-17
.. gh-issue: 95899
.. nonce: _Bi4uG
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.Runner` to call :func:`asyncio.set_event_loop` only once
to avoid calling :meth:`~asyncio.AbstractChildWatcher.attach_loop` multiple
times on child watchers. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-18-22-29
.. gh-issue: 95736
.. nonce: LzRZXe
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` to set event loop before
calling setup functions. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-08-11-03-16-48
.. gh-issue: 95865
.. nonce: 0IOkFP
.. section: Library

Speed up :func:`urllib.parse.quote_from_bytes` by replacing a list
comprehension with ``map()``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-10-17-34-07
.. gh-issue: 95861
.. nonce: qv-T5s
.. section: Library

Add support for computing Spearman's correlation coefficient to the existing
statistics.correlation() function.

..

.. date: 2022-08-10-11-54-04
.. gh-issue: 95804
.. nonce: i5FCFK
.. section: Library

Fix ``logging`` shutdown handler so it respects
``MemoryHandler.flushOnClose``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-08-01-42-11
.. gh-issue: 95704
.. nonce: MOPFfX
.. section: Library

When a task catches :exc:`asyncio.CancelledError` and raises some other
error, the other error should generally not silently be suppressed.

..

.. date: 2022-08-07-14-56-23
.. gh-issue: 95149
.. nonce: U0c6Ib
.. section: Library

The :class:`HTTPStatus <http.HTTPStatus>` enum offers a couple of properties
to indicate the HTTP status category e.g. ``HTTPStatus.OK.is_success``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-21-01-17
.. gh-issue: 95609
.. nonce: xxyjyX
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 22.2.2.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-16-52-32
.. gh-issue: 95289
.. nonce: FMnHlV
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`asyncio.TaskGroup` to propagate exception when
:exc:`asyncio.CancelledError` was replaced with another exception by a
context manager. Patch by Kumar Aditya and Guido van Rossum.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-20-58-37
.. gh-issue: 94909
.. nonce: YjMusj
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect joining of relative Windows paths with drives in
:class:`pathlib.PurePath` initializer.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-17-14-38
.. gh-issue: 95385
.. nonce: 6YlsDI
.. section: Library

Faster ``json.dumps()`` when sorting of keys is not requested (default).

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-19-47-51
.. gh-issue: 83901
.. nonce: OSw06c
.. section: Library

Improve :meth:`Signature.bind <inspect.Signature.bind>` error message for
missing keyword-only arguments.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-19-43-07
.. gh-issue: 95339
.. nonce: NuVQ68
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 22.2.1.

..

.. date: 2022-07-27-11-35-45
.. gh-issue: 95045
.. nonce: iysT-Q
.. section: Library

Fix GC crash when deallocating ``_lsprof.Profiler`` by untracking it before
calling any callbacks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-15-45-06
.. gh-issue: 95231
.. nonce: i807-g
.. section: Library

Fail gracefully if :const:`~errno.EPERM` or :const:`~errno.ENOSYS` is raised
when loading :mod:`!crypt` methods. This may happen when trying to load
``MD5`` on a Linux kernel with :abbr:`FIPS (Federal Information Processing
Standard)` enabled.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-18-00-42
.. gh-issue: 95097
.. nonce: lu5qNf
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`asyncio.run` for :class:`asyncio.Task` implementations without
:meth:`~asyncio.Task.uncancel` method. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-59-02
.. gh-issue: 95087
.. nonce: VvqXkN
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError in parsing invalid date in the :mod:`email` module.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-12-00-06
.. gh-issue: 95199
.. nonce: -5A64k
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled setuptools to 63.2.0.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-09-15-35
.. gh-issue: 95194
.. nonce: ERVmqG
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled pip to 22.2.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-50-05
.. gh-issue: 93899
.. nonce: VT34A5
.. section: Library

Fix check for existence of :const:`os.EFD_CLOEXEC`, :const:`os.EFD_NONBLOCK`
and :const:`os.EFD_SEMAPHORE` flags on older kernel versions where these
flags are not present. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-10-42-05
.. gh-issue: 95166
.. nonce: xw6p3C
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`concurrent.futures.Executor.map` to cancel the currently waiting
on future on an error - e.g. TimeoutError or KeyboardInterrupt.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-21-18-17
.. gh-issue: 95132
.. nonce: n9anlw
.. section: Library

Fix a :mod:`sqlite3` regression where ``*args`` and ``**kwds`` were
incorrectly relayed from :py:func:`~sqlite3.connect` to the
:class:`~sqlite3.Connection` factory. The regression was introduced in
3.11a1 with PR 24421 (:gh:`85128`). Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-17-19-57
.. gh-issue: 93157
.. nonce: RXByAk
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`fileinput` module didn't support ``errors`` option when
``inplace`` is true.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-09-09-08
.. gh-issue: 91212
.. nonce: 53O8Ab
.. section: Library

Fixed flickering of the turtle window when the tracer is turned off. Patch
by Shin-myoung-serp.

..

.. date: 2022-07-22-00-58-49
.. gh-issue: 95077
.. nonce: 4Z6CNC
.. section: Library

Add deprecation warning for enum ``member.member`` access (e.g.
``Color.RED.BLUE``). Remove ``EnumMeta.__getattr__``.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-22-59-22
.. gh-issue: 95109
.. nonce: usxA9r
.. section: Library

Ensure that timeouts scheduled with :class:`asyncio.Timeout` that have
already expired are delivered promptly.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-19-55-49
.. gh-issue: 95105
.. nonce: BIX2Km
.. section: Library

:meth:`wsgiref.types.InputStream.__iter__` should return
``Iterator[bytes]``, not ``Iterable[bytes]``. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-20-22-49-48
.. gh-issue: 95066
.. nonce: TuCu0E
.. section: Library

Replaced assert with exception in :func:`ast.parse`, when
``feature_version`` has an invalid major version. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-20-00-23-58
.. gh-issue: 77617
.. nonce: XGaqSQ
.. section: Library

Add :mod:`sqlite3` :ref:`command-line interface <sqlite3-cli>`. Patch by
Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-15-37-11
.. gh-issue: 95005
.. nonce: iRmZ74
.. section: Library

Replace :c:expr:`_PyAccu` with :c:expr:`_PyUnicodeWriter` in JSON encoder
and StringIO and remove the :c:expr:`_PyAccu` implementation.

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-22-31-32
.. gh-issue: 90085
.. nonce: c4FWcS
.. section: Library

Remove ``-c/--clock`` and ``-t/--time`` CLI options of :mod:`timeit`. The
options had been deprecated since Python 3.3 and the functionality was
removed in Python 3.7. Patch by Shantanu Jain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-15-08-13-51
.. gh-issue: 94857
.. nonce: 9_KvZJ
.. section: Library

Fix refleak in ``_io.TextIOWrapper.reconfigure``. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-00-43-52
.. gh-issue: 94821
.. nonce: e17ghU
.. section: Library

Fix binding of unix socket to empty address on Linux to use an available
address from the abstract namespace, instead of "\0".

..

.. date: 2022-07-11-10-41-48
.. gh-issue: 94736
.. nonce: EbsgeK
.. section: Library

Fix crash when deallocating an instance of a subclass of
``_multiprocessing.SemLock``. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-09-15-17-02
.. gh-issue: 81620
.. nonce: L0O_bV
.. section: Library

Add random.binomialvariate().

..

.. date: 2022-07-09-08-55-04
.. gh-issue: 74116
.. nonce: 0XwYC1
.. section: Library

Allow :meth:`asyncio.StreamWriter.drain` to be awaited concurrently by
multiple tasks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-17-49-12
.. gh-issue: 87822
.. nonce: F9dzkf
.. section: Library

When called with ``capture_locals=True``, the :mod:`traceback` module
functions swallow exceptions raised from calls to ``repr()`` on local
variables of frames. This is in order to prioritize the original exception
over rendering errors.  An indication of the failure is printed in place of
the missing value.  (Patch by Simon-Martin Schroeder).

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-08-39-35
.. gh-issue: 88050
.. nonce: 0aOC_m
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`asyncio` subprocess transport to kill process cleanly when process
is blocked and avoid ``RuntimeError`` when loop is closed. Patch by Kumar
Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-15-46-55
.. gh-issue: 94637
.. nonce: IYEiUM
.. section: Library

:meth:`SSLContext.set_default_verify_paths` now releases the GIL around
``SSL_CTX_set_default_verify_paths`` call. The function call performs I/O
and CPU intensive work.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-22-41-51
.. gh-issue: 94309
.. nonce: _XswsX
.. section: Library

Deprecate aliases :class:`typing.Hashable` and :class:`typing.Sized`

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-21-24-03
.. gh-issue: 92546
.. nonce: s5Upkh
.. section: Library

An undocumented ``python -m pprint`` benchmark is moved into ``pprint``
suite of pyperformance. Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-16-01-08
.. gh-issue: 94607
.. nonce: Q6RYfz
.. section: Library

Fix subclassing complex generics with type variables in :mod:`typing`.
Previously an error message saying ``Some type variables ... are not listed
in Generic[...]`` was shown. :mod:`typing` no longer populates
``__parameters__`` with the ``__parameters__`` of a Python class.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-14-57-33
.. gh-issue: 94619
.. nonce: PRqKVX
.. section: Library

Remove the long-deprecated ``module_repr()`` from :mod:`importlib`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-14-45-12
.. gh-issue: 93910
.. nonce: iZcp67
.. section: Library

The ability to access the other values of an enum on an enum (e.g.
``Color.RED.BLUE``) has been restored in order to fix a performance
regression.

..

.. date: 2022-07-06-06-02-02
.. gh-issue: 93896
.. nonce: vIgWGr
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`asyncio.run` and :class:`unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` to
always the set event loop as it was done in Python 3.10 and earlier. Patch
by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-05-17-22-00
.. gh-issue: 94343
.. nonce: kf4H5r
.. section: Library

Allow setting the attributes of ``reprlib.Repr`` during object
initialization

..

.. date: 2022-07-03-16-41-03
.. gh-issue: 94382
.. nonce: zuVZeM
.. section: Library

Port static types of ``_multiprocessing`` module to heap types. Patch by
Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-03-16-26-35
.. gh-issue: 78724
.. nonce: XNiJzf
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :class:`struct.Struct` when it was not completely initialized
by initializing it in :meth:`~object.__new__`.  Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-07-02-19-46-30
.. gh-issue: 94510
.. nonce: xOatDC
.. section: Library

Re-entrant calls to :func:`sys.setprofile` and :func:`sys.settrace` now
raise :exc:`RuntimeError`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-09-48-37
.. gh-issue: 92336
.. nonce: otA6c6
.. section: Library

Fix bug where :meth:`linecache.getline` fails on bad files with
:exc:`UnicodeDecodeError` or :exc:`SyntaxError`. It now returns an empty
string as per the documentation.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-04-42-56
.. gh-issue: 94398
.. nonce: YOq_bJ
.. section: Library

Once a :class:`asyncio.TaskGroup` has started shutting down (i.e., at least
one task has failed and the task group has started cancelling the remaining
tasks), it should not be possible to add new tasks to the task group.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-14-41-22
.. gh-issue: 94383
.. nonce: CXnquo
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree`: Remove the ``ElementTree.Element.copy()`` method of the
pure Python implementation, deprecated in Python 3.10, use the
:func:`copy.copy` function instead. The C implementation of :mod:`xml.etree`
has no ``copy()`` method, only a ``__copy__()`` method. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-14-29-21
.. gh-issue: 94379
.. nonce: RrgKfh
.. section: Library

:mod:`zipimport`: Remove ``find_loader()`` and ``find_module()`` methods,
deprecated in Python 3.10: use the ``find_spec()`` method instead. See
:pep:`451` for the rationale. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-00-24-48
.. gh-issue: 94352
.. nonce: JY1Ayt
.. section: Library

:func:`shlex.split`: Passing ``None`` for *s* argument now raises an
exception, rather than reading :data:`sys.stdin`. The feature was deprecated
in Python 3.9. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-10-33-18
.. gh-issue: 94318
.. nonce: jR4_QV
.. section: Library

Strip trailing spaces in :mod:`pydoc` text output.

..

.. date: 2022-06-26-10-59-15
.. gh-issue: 89988
.. nonce: K8rnmt
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in :class:`pickle.Pickler` when looking up
:attr:`dispatch_table`. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-23-44-44
.. gh-issue: 90016
.. nonce: EB409s
.. section: Library

Deprecate :mod:`sqlite3` :ref:`default adapters and converters
<sqlite3-default-converters>`. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-16-27-02
.. gh-issue: 94254
.. nonce: beP16v
.. section: Library

Fixed types of :mod:`struct` module to be immutable. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-13-38-53
.. gh-issue: 93259
.. nonce: FAGw-2
.. section: Library

Now raise ``ValueError`` when ``None`` or an empty string are passed to
``Distribution.from_name`` (and other callers).

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-09-12-23
.. gh-issue: 74696
.. nonce: fxC9ua
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.make_archive` now passes the *root_dir* argument to custom
archivers which support it.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-20-00-57
.. gh-issue: 94216
.. nonce: hxnQPu
.. section: Library

The :mod:`dis` module now has the opcodes for pseudo instructions (those
which are used by the compiler during code generation but then removed or
replaced by real opcodes before the final bytecode is emitted).

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-19-40-40
.. gh-issue: 93096
.. nonce: 3RlK2d
.. section: Library

Removed undocumented ``python -m codecs``. Use ``python -m unittest
test.test_codecs.EncodedFileTest`` instead.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-19-23-59
.. gh-issue: 94207
.. nonce: VhS1eS
.. section: Library

Made :class:`!_struct.Struct` GC-tracked in order to fix a reference leak in
the :mod:`!_struct` module.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-19-16-09
.. gh-issue: 93096
.. nonce: r1_oIc
.. section: Library

Removed undocumented ``-t`` argument of ``python -m base64``. Use ``python
-m unittest test.test_base64.LegacyBase64TestCase.test_encodebytes``
instead.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-18-20-42
.. gh-issue: 94226
.. nonce: 8ZL4Fm
.. section: Library

Remove the :func:`locale.format` function, deprecated in Python 3.7: use
:func:`locale.format_string` instead. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-17-11-33
.. gh-issue: 94199
.. nonce: 7releN
.. section: Library

Remove the :func:`ssl.match_hostname` function. The
:func:`ssl.match_hostname` was deprecated in Python 3.7. OpenSSL performs
hostname matching since Python 3.7, Python no longer uses the
:func:`ssl.match_hostname` function. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-14-25-26
.. gh-issue: 94214
.. nonce: 03pXR5
.. section: Library

Document the ``context`` object used in the ``venv.EnvBuilder`` class, and
add the new environment's library path to it.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-10-39-56
.. gh-issue: 94199
.. nonce: MIuckY
.. section: Library

Remove the :func:`ssl.wrap_socket` function, deprecated in Python 3.7:
instead, create a :class:`ssl.SSLContext` object and call its
:class:`ssl.SSLContext.wrap_socket` method. Any package that still uses
:func:`ssl.wrap_socket` is broken and insecure. The function neither sends a
SNI TLS extension nor validates server hostname. Code is subject to :cwe:`295`
Improper Certificate Validation. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-10-29-19
.. gh-issue: 94199
.. nonce: pfehmz
.. section: Library

Remove the :func:`ssl.RAND_pseudo_bytes` function, deprecated in Python 3.6:
use :func:`os.urandom` or :func:`ssl.RAND_bytes` instead. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-10-18-59
.. gh-issue: 94199
.. nonce: kYOo8g
.. section: Library

:mod:`hashlib`: Remove the pure Python implementation of
:func:`hashlib.pbkdf2_hmac`, deprecated in Python 3.10. Python 3.10 and
newer requires OpenSSL 1.1.1 (:pep:`644`): this OpenSSL version provides a C
implementation of :func:`~hashlib.pbkdf2_hmac` which is faster. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-09-41-41
.. gh-issue: 94196
.. nonce: r2KyfS
.. section: Library

:mod:`gzip`: Remove the ``filename`` attribute of :class:`gzip.GzipFile`,
deprecated since Python 2.6, use the :attr:`~gzip.GzipFile.name` attribute
instead. In write mode, the ``filename`` attribute added ``'.gz'`` file
extension if it was not present. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-24-08-49-47
.. gh-issue: 94182
.. nonce: Wknau0
.. section: Library

run the :class:`asyncio.PidfdChildWatcher` on the running loop, this allows
event loops to run subprocesses when there is no default event loop running
on the main thread

..

.. date: 2022-06-23-14-35-10
.. gh-issue: 94169
.. nonce: jeba90
.. section: Library

Remove ``io.OpenWrapper`` and ``_pyio.OpenWrapper``, deprecated in Python
3.10: just use :func:`open` instead. The :func:`open` (:func:`io.open`)
function is a built-in function. Since Python 3.10, :func:`!_pyio.open` is
also a static method. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-23-13-12-05
.. gh-issue: 91742
.. nonce: sNytVX
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`pdb` crash after jump caused by a null pointer dereference. Patch
by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-06-22-11-16-11
.. gh-issue: 94101
.. nonce: V9vDG8
.. section: Library

Manual instantiation of :class:`ssl.SSLSession` objects is no longer allowed
as it lead to misconfigured instances that crashed the interpreter when
attributes where accessed on them.

..

.. date: 2022-06-21-11-40-31
.. gh-issue: 84753
.. nonce: FW1pxO
.. section: Library

:func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction`, :func:`inspect.isgeneratorfunction`,
and :func:`inspect.isasyncgenfunction` now properly return ``True`` for
duck-typed function-like objects like instances of
:class:`unittest.mock.AsyncMock`.

This makes :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction` consistent with the behavior
of :func:`asyncio.iscoroutinefunction`.  Patch by Mehdi ABAAKOUK.

..

.. date: 2022-06-20-23-14-43
.. gh-issue: 94028
.. nonce: UofEcX
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in the :mod:`sqlite3` where statement objects were not
properly cleared and reset after use in cursor iters. The regression was
introduced by PR 27884 in Python 3.11a1. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-18-15-06-54
.. gh-issue: 93973
.. nonce: 4y6UQT
.. section: Library

Add keyword argument ``all_errors`` to ``asyncio.create_connection`` so that
multiple connection errors can be raised as an ``ExceptionGroup``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-16-00-55
.. gh-issue: 93963
.. nonce: 8YYZ-2
.. section: Library

Officially deprecate from ``importlib.abc`` classes moved to
``importlib.resources.abc``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-12-02-30
.. gh-issue: 93858
.. nonce: R49ARc
.. section: Library

Prevent error when activating venv in nested fish instances.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-11-16-53
.. gh-issue: 93820
.. nonce: 00X0Y5
.. section: Library

Pickle :class:`enum.Flag` by name.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-09-24-50
.. gh-issue: 93847
.. nonce: kuv8bN
.. section: Library

Fix repr of enum of generic aliases.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-21-35-11
.. gh-issue: 91404
.. nonce: 39TZzW
.. section: Library

Revert the :mod:`re` memory leak when a match is terminated by a signal or
memory allocation failure as the implemented fix caused a major performance
regression.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-21-28-16
.. gh-issue: 83499
.. nonce: u3DQJ-
.. section: Library

Fix double closing of file description in :mod:`tempfile`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-21-20-02
.. gh-issue: 93820
.. nonce: FAMLY8
.. section: Library

Fixed a regression when :func:`copy.copy`-ing :class:`enum.Flag` with
multiple flag members.

..

.. date: 2022-06-11-13-32-17
.. gh-issue: 79512
.. nonce: A1KTDr
.. section: Library

Fixed names and ``__module__`` value of :mod:`weakref` classes
:class:`~weakref.ReferenceType`, :class:`~weakref.ProxyType`,
:class:`~weakref.CallableProxyType`. It makes them pickleable.

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-17-15-26
.. gh-issue: 91389
.. nonce: OE4vS5
.. section: Library

Fix an issue where :mod:`dis` utilities could report missing or incorrect
position information in the presence of ``CACHE`` entries.

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-14-44-21
.. gh-issue: 93626
.. nonce: sfghs46
.. section: Library

Set ``__future__.annotations`` to have a ``None`` mandatoryRelease to
indicate that it is currently 'TBD'.

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-10-12-55
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: 683m_C
.. section: Library

Emscripten and WASI have no home directory and cannot provide :pep:`370`
user site directory.

..

.. date: 2022-06-08-20-11-02
.. gh-issue: 90494
.. nonce: LIZT85
.. section: Library

:func:`copy.copy` and :func:`copy.deepcopy` now always raise a TypeError if
``__reduce__()`` returns a tuple with length 6 instead of silently ignore
the 6th item or produce incorrect result.

..

.. date: 2022-06-07-14-53-46
.. gh-issue: 90549
.. nonce: T4FMKY
.. section: Library

Fix a multiprocessing bug where a global named resource (such as a
semaphore) could leak when a child process is spawned (as opposed to
forked).

..

.. date: 2022-06-06-13-19-43
.. gh-issue: 93521
.. nonce: _vE8m9
.. section: Library

Fixed a case where dataclasses would try to add ``__weakref__`` into the
``__slots__`` for a dataclass that specified ``weakref_slot=True`` when it
was already defined in one of its bases. This resulted in a ``TypeError``
upon the new class being created.

..

.. date: 2022-06-06-12-58-27
.. gh-issue: 79579
.. nonce: e8rB-M
.. section: Library

:mod:`sqlite3` now correctly detects DML queries with leading comments.
Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-05-22-22-42
.. gh-issue: 93421
.. nonce: 43UO_8
.. section: Library

Update :data:`sqlite3.Cursor.rowcount` when a DML statement has run to
completion. This fixes the row count for SQL queries like ``UPDATE ...
RETURNING``. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-04-00-11-54
.. gh-issue: 93475
.. nonce: vffFw1
.. section: Library

Expose ``FICLONE`` and ``FICLONERANGE`` constants in :mod:`fcntl`. Patch by
Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-22-13-28
.. gh-issue: 93370
.. nonce: tjfu9L
.. section: Library

Deprecate :data:`!version` and :data:`!version_info`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-02-08-40-58
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: Gtk44w
.. section: Library

Suppress writing an XML declaration in open files in ``ElementTree.write()``
with ``encoding='unicode'`` and ``xml_declaration=None``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-01-11-24-13
.. gh-issue: 91162
.. nonce: NxvU_u
.. section: Library

Support splitting of unpacked arbitrary-length tuple over ``TypeVar`` and
``TypeVarTuple`` parameters. For example:

* ``A[T, *Ts][*tuple[int, ...]]`` -> ``A[int, *tuple[int, ...]]``
* ``A[*Ts, T][*tuple[int, ...]]`` -> ``A[*tuple[int, ...], int]``

..

.. date: 2022-05-31-14-58-40
.. gh-issue: 93353
.. nonce: 9Hvm6o
.. section: Library

Fix the :func:`importlib.resources.as_file` context manager to remove the
temporary file if destroyed late during Python finalization: keep a local
reference to the :func:`os.remove` function. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-30-21-42-50
.. gh-issue: 83658
.. nonce: 01Ntx0
.. section: Library

Make :class:`multiprocessing.Pool` raise an exception if
``maxtasksperchild`` is not ``None`` or a positive int.

..

.. date: 2022-05-28-08-02-55
.. gh-issue: 93312
.. nonce: HY0Uzj
.. section: Library

Add :const:`os.PIDFD_NONBLOCK` flag to open a file descriptor for a process
with :func:`os.pidfd_open` in non-blocking mode. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-27-22-17-11
.. gh-issue: 88123
.. nonce: mkYl5q
.. section: Library

Implement ``Enum.__contains__`` that returns ``True`` or ``False`` to replace the
deprecated behaviour that would sometimes raise a :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-27-13-18-18
.. gh-issue: 93297
.. nonce: e2zuHz
.. section: Library

Make asyncio task groups prevent child tasks from being GCed

..

.. date: 2022-05-27-10-52-06
.. gh-issue: 85308
.. nonce: K6r-tJ
.. section: Library

Changed :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` to use :term:`filesystem encoding
and error handler` instead of default text encoding to read arguments from
file (e.g. ``fromfile_prefix_chars`` option). This change affects Windows;
argument file should be encoded with UTF-8 instead of ANSI Codepage.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-23-10-55
.. gh-issue: 93156
.. nonce: 4XfDVN
.. section: Library

Accessing the :attr:`pathlib.PurePath.parents` sequence of an absolute path
using negative index values produced incorrect results.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-09-24-41
.. gh-issue: 93162
.. nonce: W1VuhU
.. section: Library

Add the ability for :func:`logging.config.dictConfig` to usefully configure
:class:`~logging.handlers.QueueHandler` and
:class:`~logging.handlers.QueueListener` as a pair, and add
:func:`logging.getHandlerByName` and :func:`logging.getHandlerNames` APIs to
allow access to handlers by name.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-08-41-34
.. gh-issue: 93243
.. nonce: uw6x5z
.. section: Library

The :mod:`!smtpd` module was removed per the schedule in :pep:`594`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-22-09-38
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: ylwDSc
.. section: Library

Replace ``assert`` statements with ``raise AssertionError()`` in
:class:`~wsgiref.BaseHandler` so that the tested behaviour is maintained
running with optimizations ``(-O)``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-15-57-39
.. gh-issue: 90155
.. nonce: YMstB5
.. section: Library

Fix broken :class:`asyncio.Semaphore` when acquire is cancelled.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-02-45-41
.. gh-issue: 90817
.. nonce: yxANgU
.. section: Library

The :func:`locale.resetlocale` function is deprecated and will be removed in
Python 3.13. Use ``locale.setlocale(locale.LC_ALL, "")`` instead. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-00-21-28
.. gh-issue: 91513
.. nonce: 9VyCT4
.. section: Library

Added ``taskName`` attribute to :mod:`logging` module for use with
:mod:`asyncio` tasks.

..

.. date: 2022-05-24-11-19-04
.. gh-issue: 74696
.. nonce: -cnf-A
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.make_archive` no longer temporarily changes the current
working directory during creation of standard ``.zip`` or tar archives.

..

.. date: 2022-05-24-10-59-02
.. gh-issue: 92728
.. nonce: zxTifq
.. section: Library

The :func:`re.template` function and the corresponding :const:`re.TEMPLATE`
and :const:`re.T` flags are restored after they were removed in 3.11.0b1,
but they are now deprecated, so they might be removed from Python 3.13.

..

.. date: 2022-05-22-23-46-18
.. gh-issue: 93033
.. nonce: wZfiL-
.. section: Library

Search in some strings (platform dependent i.e [U+0xFFFF, U+0x0100] on
Windows or [U+0xFFFFFFFF, U+0x00010000] on Linux 64-bit) are now up to 10
times faster.

..

.. date: 2022-05-22-16-08-01
.. gh-issue: 89973
.. nonce: jc-Q4g
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`re.error` raised in :mod:`fnmatch` if the pattern contains a
character range with upper bound lower than lower bound (e.g. ``[c-a]``).
Now such ranges are interpreted as empty ranges.

..

.. date: 2022-05-21-13-16-16
.. gh-issue: 93044
.. nonce: eJ_XkZ
.. section: Library

No longer convert the database argument of :func:`sqlite3.connect` to bytes
before passing it to the factory.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-15-52-43
.. gh-issue: 93010
.. nonce: WF-cAc
.. section: Library

In a very special case, the email package tried to append the nonexistent
``InvalidHeaderError`` to the defect list. It should have been
``InvalidHeaderDefect``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-22-34-42
.. gh-issue: 92986
.. nonce: e6uKxj
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`ast.unparse` when ``ImportFrom.level`` is ``None``

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-17-49-58
.. gh-issue: 92932
.. nonce: o2peTh
.. section: Library

Now :func:`~dis.dis` and :func:`~dis.get_instructions` handle operand values
for instructions prefixed by ``EXTENDED_ARG_QUICK``. Patch by Sam Gross and
Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-13-33-18
.. gh-issue: 92675
.. nonce: ZeerMZ
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`venv.ensure_directories` to accept :class:`pathlib.Path`
arguments in addition to :class:`str` paths. Patch by David Foster.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-21-04-09
.. gh-issue: 87901
.. nonce: lnf041
.. section: Library

Removed the ``encoding`` argument from :func:`os.popen` that was added in
3.11b1.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-17-18-41
.. gh-issue: 91922
.. nonce: DwWIsJ
.. section: Library

Fix function :func:`sqlite.connect` and the :class:`sqlite.Connection`
constructor on non-UTF-8 locales. Also, they now support bytes paths
non-decodable with the current FS encoding.

..

.. date: 2022-05-17-06-27-39
.. gh-issue: 92869
.. nonce: t8oBkw
.. section: Library

Added :class:`~ctypes.c_time_t` to :mod:`ctypes`, which has the same size as
the :c:type:`time_t` type in C.

..

.. date: 2022-05-16-14-35-39
.. gh-issue: 92839
.. nonce: owSMyo
.. section: Library

Fixed crash resulting from calling bisect.insort() or bisect.insort_left()
with the key argument not equal to ``None``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-14-11-41-23
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: kPdOZl
.. section: Library

:mod:`subprocess` now fails early on Emscripten and WASI platforms to work
around missing :func:`os.pipe` on WASI.

..

.. date: 2022-05-14-09-01-38
.. gh-issue: 89325
.. nonce: ys-2BZ
.. section: Library

Removed many old deprecated :mod:`unittest` features:
:class:`~unittest.TestCase` method aliases, undocumented and broken
:class:`~unittest.TestCase` method ``assertDictContainsSubset``,
undocumented :meth:`TestLoader.loadTestsFromModule
<unittest.TestLoader.loadTestsFromModule>` parameter *use_load_tests*, and
an underscored alias of the :class:`~unittest.TextTestResult` class.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-15-19-00
.. gh-issue: 92734
.. nonce: d0wjDt
.. section: Library

Allow multi-element reprs emitted by :mod:`reprlib` to be pretty-printed
using configurable indentation.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-19-33-27
.. gh-issue: 92671
.. nonce: KE4v6a
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`ast.unparse` for empty tuples in the assignment target context.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-14-34-09
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: glkou2
.. section: Library

:meth:`~datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp` no longer attempts to resolve
``fold`` in the pure Python implementation, since the fold is never 1 in
UTC. In addition to being slightly faster in the common case, this also
prevents some errors when the timestamp is close to :attr:`datetime.min
<datetime.datetime.min>`.  Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-10-06-31
.. gh-issue: 86388
.. nonce: 7ivUtT
.. section: Library

Removed randrange() functionality deprecated since Python 3.10.  Formerly,
randrange(10.0) losslessly converted to randrange(10). Now, it raises a
TypeError. Also, the exception raised for non-integral values such as
randrange(10.5) or randrange('10') has been changed from ValueError to
TypeError.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-16-30-40
.. gh-issue: 90385
.. nonce: 1_wBRQ
.. section: Library

Add :meth:`pathlib.Path.walk` as an alternative to :func:`os.walk`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-07-57-27
.. gh-issue: 92550
.. nonce: Rk_UzM
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`pathlib.Path.rglob` for empty pattern.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-22-27-11
.. gh-issue: 92591
.. nonce: V7RCk2
.. section: Library

Allow :mod:`logging` filters to return a :class:`logging.LogRecord` instance
so that filters attached to :class:`logging.Handler`\ s can enrich records
without side effects on other handlers.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-21-31-41
.. gh-issue: 92445
.. nonce: tJosdm
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :mod:`argparse` where ``nargs="*"`` would raise an error
instead of returning an empty list when 0 arguments were supplied if choice
was also defined in ``parser.add_argument``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-11-55-04
.. gh-issue: 92547
.. nonce: CzVZft
.. section: Library

Remove undocumented :mod:`sqlite3` features deprecated in Python 3.10:

* ``sqlite3.enable_shared_cache()``
* ``sqlite3.OptimizedUnicode``

Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-09-28-02
.. gh-issue: 92530
.. nonce: M4Q1RS
.. section: Library

Fix an issue that occurred after interrupting
:func:`threading.Condition.notify`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-01-27-25
.. gh-issue: 92531
.. nonce: vV7S_O
.. section: Library

The statistics.median_grouped() function now always return a float.
Formerly, it did not convert the input type when for sequences of length
one.

..

.. date: 2022-05-08-19-21-14
.. gh-issue: 84131
.. nonce: rG5kI7
.. section: Library

The :class:`pathlib.Path` deprecated method ``link_to`` has been removed.
Use 3.10's :meth:`~pathlib.Path.hardlink_to` method instead as its semantics
are consistent with that of :meth:`~pathlib.Path.symlink_to`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-08-18-51-14
.. gh-issue: 89336
.. nonce: TL6ip7
.. section: Library

Removed :mod:`configparser` module APIs: the ``SafeConfigParser`` class
alias, the ``ParsingError.filename`` property and parameter, and the
``ConfigParser.readfp`` method, all of which were deprecated since Python
3.2.

..

.. date: 2022-05-06-13-00-57
.. gh-issue: 92391
.. nonce: s-Lase
.. section: Library

Add :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__` to  :class:`csv.DictReader` and
:class:`csv.DictWriter`, allowing them to be parameterized at runtime. Patch
by Marc Mueller.

..

.. date: 2022-04-26-18-37-24
.. gh-issue: 91968
.. nonce: fuuH1_
.. section: Library

Add ``SO_RTABLE`` and ``SO_USER_COOKIE`` constants to :mod:`socket`.

..

.. date: 2022-04-25-10-23-01
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: DOHa6B
.. section: Library

:class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree` method
:meth:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree.write` and function
:func:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.tostring` now use the text file's encoding
("UTF-8" if not available) instead of locale encoding in XML declaration
when ``encoding="unicode"`` is specified.

..

.. date: 2022-04-24-22-26-45
.. gh-issue: 81790
.. nonce: M5Rvpm
.. section: Library

:func:`os.path.splitdrive` now understands DOS device paths with UNC links
(beginning ``\\?\UNC\``). Contributed by Barney Gale.

..

.. date: 2022-04-21-19-14-29
.. gh-issue: 91760
.. nonce: 54AR-m
.. section: Library

Apply more strict rules for numerical group references and group names in
regular expressions. Only sequence of ASCII digits is now accepted as a
numerical reference. The group name in bytes patterns and replacement
strings can now only contain ASCII letters and digits and underscore.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-22-07-36
.. gh-issue: 90622
.. nonce: 0C6l8h
.. section: Library

Worker processes for :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` are no
longer spawned on demand (a feature added in 3.9) when the multiprocessing
context start method is ``"fork"`` as that can lead to deadlocks in the
child processes due to a fork happening while threads are running.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-17-38-55
.. gh-issue: 91577
.. nonce: Ah7cLL
.. section: Library

Move imports in :class:`~multiprocessing.SharedMemory` methods to module
level so that they can be executed late in python finalization.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-13-16-25
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: 9OGsrN
.. section: Library

Remove an unhandled error case in the C implementation of calls to
:meth:`datetime.fromtimestamp <datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp>` with no
time zone (i.e. getting a local time from an epoch timestamp). This should
have no user-facing effect other than giving a possibly more accurate error
message when called with timestamps that fall on 10000-01-01 in the local
time. Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-11-29-38
.. gh-issue: 91539
.. nonce: 7WgVuA
.. section: Library

Improve performance of ``urllib.request.getproxies_environment`` when there
are many environment variables

..

.. date: 2022-04-14-08-37-16
.. gh-issue: 91524
.. nonce: g8PiIu
.. section: Library

Speed up the regular expression substitution (functions :func:`re.sub` and
:func:`re.subn` and corresponding :class:`re.Pattern` methods) for
replacement strings containing group references by 2--3 times.

..

.. date: 2022-04-12-18-05-40
.. gh-issue: 91447
.. nonce: N_Fs4H
.. section: Library

Fix findtext in the xml module to only give an empty string when the text
attribute is set to ``None``.

..

.. date: 2022-04-11-16-55-41
.. gh-issue: 91456
.. nonce: DK3KKl
.. section: Library

Deprecate current default auto() behavior:  In 3.13 the default will be for
for auto() to always return the largest member value incremented by 1, and
to raise if incompatible value types are used.

..

.. bpo: 47231
.. date: 2022-04-08-22-12-11
.. nonce: lvyglt
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue with inconsistent trailing slashes in tarfile longname
directories.

..

.. bpo: 39064
.. date: 2022-04-03-19-40-09
.. nonce: 76PbIz
.. section: Library

:class:`zipfile.ZipFile` now raises :exc:`zipfile.BadZipFile` instead of
``ValueError`` when reading a corrupt zip file in which the central
directory offset is negative.

..

.. bpo: 41287
.. date: 2022-04-03-11-25-02
.. nonce: 8CTdwf
.. section: Library

Fix handling of the ``doc`` argument in subclasses of :func:`property`.

..

.. date: 2022-04-01-12-35-44
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: pvaLHQ
.. section: Library

:mod:`ctypes` dependency ``libffi`` is now detected with ``pkg-config``.

..

.. bpo: 32547
.. date: 2022-04-01-09-43-54
.. nonce: NIUiNC
.. section: Library

The constructors for :class:`~csv.DictWriter` and :class:`~csv.DictReader`
now coerce the ``fieldnames`` argument to a :class:`list` if it is an
iterator.

..

.. bpo: 35540
.. date: 2022-03-22-18-28-55
.. nonce: nyijX9
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`dataclasses.asdict` crash when :class:`collections.defaultdict`
is present in the attributes.

..

.. bpo: 47063
.. date: 2022-03-19-04-41-42
.. nonce: nwRfUo
.. section: Library

Add an index_pages parameter to support using non-default index page names.

..

.. bpo: 47025
.. date: 2022-03-16-14-24-14
.. nonce: qtT3CE
.. section: Library

Drop support for :class:`bytes` on :data:`sys.path`.

..

.. bpo: 46951
.. date: 2022-03-08-04-46-44
.. nonce: SWAz97
.. section: Library

Order the contents of zipapp archives, to make builds more reproducible.

..

.. bpo: 42777
.. date: 2022-02-21-01-37-00
.. nonce: nWK3E6
.. section: Library

Implement :meth:`pathlib.Path.is_mount` for Windows paths.

..

.. bpo: 46755
.. date: 2022-02-15-12-40-48
.. nonce: zePJfx
.. section: Library

In :class:`QueueHandler`, clear ``stack_info`` from :class:`LogRecord` to
prevent stack trace from being written twice.

..

.. bpo: 45393
.. date: 2022-02-09-23-44-27
.. nonce: 9v5Y8U
.. section: Library

Fix the formatting for ``await x`` and ``not x`` in the operator precedence
table when using the :func:`help` system.

..

.. bpo: 46642
.. date: 2022-02-05-18-46-54
.. nonce: YI6nHQ
.. section: Library

Improve error message when trying to subclass an instance of
:data:`typing.TypeVar`, :data:`typing.ParamSpec`,
:data:`typing.TypeVarTuple`, etc. Based on patch by Gregory Beauregard.

..

.. bpo: 46364
.. date: 2022-01-14-10-49-20
.. nonce: SzhlU9
.. section: Library

Restrict use of sockets instead of pipes for stdin of subprocesses created
by :mod:`asyncio` to AIX platform only.

..

.. bpo: 28249
.. date: 2022-01-09-14-23-00
.. nonce: 4dzB80
.. section: Library

Set :attr:`doctest.DocTest.lineno` to ``None`` when an object does not have
:attr:`~definition.__doc__`.

..

.. bpo: 46197
.. date: 2022-01-03-15-07-06
.. nonce: Z0djv6
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`ensurepip` environment isolation for subprocess running ``pip``.

..

.. bpo: 45924
.. date: 2021-12-27-15-32-15
.. nonce: 0ZpHX2
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`asyncio` incorrect traceback when future's exception is raised
multiple times. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. bpo: 45046
.. date: 2021-08-29-19-59-16
.. nonce: eGq0NC
.. section: Library

Add support of context managers in :mod:`unittest`: methods
:meth:`~unittest.TestCase.enterContext` and
:meth:`~unittest.TestCase.enterClassContext` of class
:class:`~unittest.TestCase`, method
:meth:`~unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase.enterAsyncContext` of class
:class:`~unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` and function
:func:`unittest.enterModuleContext`.

..

.. bpo: 44173
.. date: 2021-08-27-18-07-35
.. nonce: oW92Ev
.. section: Library

Enable fast seeking of uncompressed unencrypted :class:`zipfile.ZipExtFile`

..

.. bpo: 42627
.. date: 2021-05-22-07-58-59
.. nonce: EejtD0
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect parsing of Windows registry proxy settings

..

.. bpo: 42047
.. date: 2020-10-15-18-37-12
.. nonce: XDdoSF
.. section: Library

Add :func:`threading.get_native_id` support for DragonFly BSD. Patch by
David Carlier.

..

.. bpo: 14243
.. date: 2020-09-28-04-56-04
.. nonce: YECnxv
.. section: Library

The :class:`tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile` function has a new optional
parameter *delete_on_close*

..

.. bpo: 41246
.. date: 2020-07-08-20-32-13
.. nonce: 2trYf3
.. section: Library

Give the same callback function for when the overlapped operation is done to
the functions ``recv``, ``recv_into``, ``recvfrom``, ``sendto``, ``send``
and ``sendfile`` inside ``IocpProactor``.

..

.. bpo: 39264
.. date: 2020-01-09-01-57-12
.. nonce: GsBL9-
.. section: Library

Fixed :meth:`collections.UserDict.get` to not call :meth:`~object.__missing__` when
a value is not found. This matches the behavior of :class:`dict`. Patch by
Bar Harel.

..

.. bpo: 38693
.. date: 2019-11-04-22-21-27
.. nonce: w_OAov
.. section: Library

:mod:`importlib` now uses f-strings internally instead of ``str.format``.

..

.. bpo: 38267
.. date: 2019-09-25-00-37-51
.. nonce: X9Jb5V
.. section: Library

Add *timeout* parameter to :meth:`asyncio.loop.shutdown_default_executor`.
The default value is ``None``, which means the executor will be given an
unlimited amount of time. When called from :class:`asyncio.Runner` or
:func:`asyncio.run`, the default timeout is 5 minutes.

..

.. bpo: 34828
.. date: 2018-09-28-22-18-03
.. nonce: 5Zyi_S
.. section: Library

:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.iterdump` now handles databases that use
``AUTOINCREMENT`` in one or more tables.

..

.. bpo: 32990
.. date: 2018-09-23-07-47-29
.. nonce: 2FVVTU
.. section: Library

Support reading wave files with the ``WAVE_FORMAT_EXTENSIBLE`` format in the
:mod:`wave` module.

..

.. bpo: 26253
.. date: 2017-07-31-13-35-28
.. nonce: 8v_sCs
.. section: Library

Allow adjustable compression level for tarfile streams in
:func:`tarfile.open`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-16-17-34-45
.. gh-issue: 85525
.. nonce: DvkD0v
.. section: Documentation

Remove extra row

..

.. date: 2022-10-11-09-40-50
.. gh-issue: 86404
.. nonce: dEAb8W
.. section: Documentation

Deprecated tools ``make suspicious`` and ``rstlint.py`` are now removed.
They have been replaced by :pypi:`sphinx-lint`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-02-10-58-52
.. gh-issue: 97741
.. nonce: 39l023
.. section: Documentation

Fix ``!`` in c domain ref target syntax via a ``conf.py`` patch, so it works
as intended to disable ref target resolution.

..

.. date: 2022-09-01-17-03-04
.. gh-issue: 96432
.. nonce: 1EJ1-4
.. section: Documentation

Fraction literals now support whitespace around the forward slash,
``Fraction('2 / 3')``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-19-17-07-45
.. gh-issue: 96098
.. nonce: nDp43u
.. section: Documentation

Improve discoverability of the higher level concurrent.futures module by
providing clearer links from the lower level threading and multiprocessing
modules.

..

.. date: 2022-08-13-20-34-51
.. gh-issue: 95957
.. nonce: W9ZZAx
.. section: Documentation

What's New 3.11 now has instructions for how to provide compiler and linker
flags for Tcl/Tk and OpenSSL on RHEL 7 and CentOS 7.

..

.. date: 2022-08-12-01-12-52
.. gh-issue: 95588
.. nonce: PA0FI7
.. section: Documentation

Clarified the conflicting advice given in the :mod:`ast` documentation about
:func:`ast.literal_eval` being "safe" for use on untrusted input while at
the same time warning that it can crash the process. The latter statement is
true and is deemed unfixable without a large amount of work unsuitable for a
bugfix. So we keep the warning and no longer claim that ``literal_eval`` is
safe.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-13-35-08
.. gh-issue: 91207
.. nonce: eJ4pPf
.. section: Documentation

Fix stylesheet not working in Windows CHM htmlhelp docs and add warning that
they are deprecated. Contributed by C.A.M. Gerlach.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-00-23-11
.. gh-issue: 95454
.. nonce: we7AFm
.. section: Documentation

Replaced incorrectly written true/false values in documentation. Patch by
Robert O'Shea

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-23-02-19
.. gh-issue: 95451
.. nonce: -tgB93
.. section: Documentation

Update library documentation with :ref:`availability information
<wasm-availability>` on WebAssembly platforms ``wasm32-emscripten`` and
``wasm32-wasi``.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-09-04-02
.. gh-issue: 95415
.. nonce: LKTyw6
.. section: Documentation

Use consistent syntax for platform availability. The directive now supports
a content body and emits a warning when it encounters an unknown platform.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-08-42-05
.. gh-issue: 94321
.. nonce: pmCIPb
.. section: Documentation

Document the :pep:`246` style protocol type
:class:`sqlite3.PrepareProtocol`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-19-18-18-22
.. gh-issue: 86128
.. nonce: 39DDTD
.. section: Documentation

Document a limitation in ThreadPoolExecutor where its exit handler is
executed before any handlers in atexit.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-10-10-59
.. gh-issue: 61162
.. nonce: 1ypkG8
.. section: Documentation

Clarify :mod:`sqlite3` behavior when
:ref:`sqlite3-connection-context-manager`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-12-12-49
.. gh-issue: 87260
.. nonce: epyI7D
.. section: Documentation

Align :mod:`sqlite3` argument specs with the actual implementation.

..

.. date: 2022-05-29-21-22-54
.. gh-issue: 86986
.. nonce: lFXw8j
.. section: Documentation

The minimum Sphinx version required to build the documentation is now 3.2.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-14-51-25
.. gh-issue: 88831
.. nonce: 5Cccr5
.. section: Documentation

Augmented documentation of asyncio.create_task(). Clarified the need to keep
strong references to tasks and added a code snippet detailing how to do this.

..

.. date: 2022-05-26-11-33-23
.. gh-issue: 86438
.. nonce: kEGGmK
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that :option:`-W` and :envvar:`PYTHONWARNINGS` are matched literally
and case-insensitively, rather than as regular expressions, in
:mod:`warnings`.

..

.. date: 2022-05-20-18-42-10
.. gh-issue: 93031
.. nonce: c2RdJe
.. section: Documentation

Update tutorial introduction output to use 3.10+ SyntaxError invalid range.

..

.. date: 2022-05-18-23-58-26
.. gh-issue: 92240
.. nonce: bHvYiz
.. section: Documentation

Added release dates for "What's New in Python 3.X" for 3.0, 3.1, 3.2, 3.8
and 3.10

..

.. bpo: 47161
.. date: 2022-03-30-17-56-01
.. nonce: gesHfS
.. section: Documentation

Document that :class:`pathlib.PurePath` does not collapse initial double
slashes because they denote UNC paths.

..

.. bpo: 40838
.. date: 2022-01-13-16-03-15
.. nonce: k3NVCf
.. section: Documentation

Document that :func:`inspect.getdoc`, :func:`inspect.getmodule`, and
:func:`inspect.getsourcefile` might return ``None``.

..

.. bpo: 43689
.. date: 2021-04-01-08-09-34
.. nonce: mqCfLe
.. section: Documentation

The ``Differ`` documentation now also mentions other whitespace characters,
which make it harder to understand the diff output.

..

.. bpo: 38056
.. date: 2019-09-12-08-28-17
.. nonce: 6ktYkc
.. section: Documentation

Overhaul the :ref:`error-handlers` documentation in :mod:`codecs`.

..

.. bpo: 13553
.. date: 2017-12-10-19-13-39
.. nonce: gQbZs4
.. section: Documentation

Document tkinter.Tk args.

..

.. date: 2022-10-20-17-49-50
.. gh-issue: 95027
.. nonce: viRpJB
.. section: Tests

On Windows, when the Python test suite is run with the ``-jN`` option, the
ANSI code page is now used as the encoding for the stdout temporary file,
rather than using UTF-8 which can lead to decoding errors. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-08-18-31-26
.. gh-issue: 96624
.. nonce: 5cANM1
.. section: Tests

Fixed the failure of repeated runs of ``test.test_unittest`` caused by side
effects in ``test_dotted_but_module_not_loaded``.

..

.. date: 2022-08-22-14-59-42
.. gh-issue: 95243
.. nonce: DeD66V
.. section: Tests

Mitigate the inherent race condition from using find_unused_port() in
testSockName() by trying to find an unused port a few times before failing.
Patch by Ross Burton.

..

.. date: 2022-08-05-09-57-43
.. gh-issue: 95573
.. nonce: edMdQB
.. section: Tests

:source:`Lib/test/test_asyncio/test_ssl.py` exposed a bug in the macOS
kernel where intense concurrent load on non-blocking sockets occasionally
causes :const:`errno.ENOBUFS` ("No buffer space available") to be emitted.
FB11063974 filed with Apple, in the mean time as a workaround buffer size
used in tests on macOS is decreased to avoid intermittent failures.  Patch
by Fantix King.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-15-22-19
.. gh-issue: 95280
.. nonce: h8HvbP
.. section: Tests

Fix problem with ``test_ssl`` ``test_get_ciphers`` on systems that require
perfect forward secrecy (PFS) ciphers.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-20-19-05
.. gh-issue: 95212
.. nonce: fHiU4e
.. section: Tests

Make multiprocessing test case ``test_shared_memory_recreate``
parallel-safe.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-17-24-42
.. gh-issue: 95218
.. nonce: zfBLtu
.. section: Tests

Move tests for importlib.resources into test_importlib.resources.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-16-28-31
.. gh-issue: 93963
.. nonce: UB9azu
.. section: Tests

Updated tests to use preferred location for ``importlib.resources`` ABCs.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-12-22-00
.. gh-issue: 94675
.. nonce: IiTs5f
.. section: Tests

Add a regression test for :mod:`re` exponentional slowdown when using
rjsmin.

..

.. date: 2022-07-05-17-53-13
.. gh-issue: 91330
.. nonce: Qys5IL
.. section: Tests

Added more tests for :mod:`dataclasses` to cover behavior with data
descriptor-based fields.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-21-27-20
.. gh-issue: 94208
.. nonce: VR6HX-
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl`` is now checking for supported TLS version and protocols in more
tests.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-08-53-40
.. gh-issue: 94315
.. nonce: MoZT9t
.. section: Tests

Tests now check for DAC override capability instead of relying on
:func:`os.geteuid`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-21-17-37-46
.. gh-issue: 54781
.. nonce: BjVAVg
.. section: Tests

Rename test_tk to test_tkinter, and rename test_ttk_guionly to test_ttk.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-20-23-04-52
.. gh-issue: 93839
.. nonce: OE3Ybk
.. section: Tests

Move ``Lib/ctypes/test/`` to ``Lib/test/test_ctypes/``. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-15-20-09
.. gh-issue: 93951
.. nonce: CW1Vv4
.. section: Tests

In test_bdb.StateTestCase.test_skip, avoid including auxiliary importers.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-13-55-11
.. gh-issue: 93957
.. nonce: X4ovYV
.. section: Tests

Provide nicer error reporting from subprocesses in
test_venv.EnsurePipTest.test_with_pip.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-13-27-21
.. gh-issue: 93884
.. nonce: 5pvPvl
.. section: Tests

Add test cases for :c:func:`PyNumber_ToBase` that take a large number or a
non-int object as parameter.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-21-38-18
.. gh-issue: 93852
.. nonce: U_Hl6s
.. section: Tests

test_asyncio, test_logging, test_socket and test_socketserver now create
AF_UNIX domains in the current directory to no longer fail with
``OSError("AF_UNIX path too long")`` if the temporary directory (the
:envvar:`TMPDIR` environment variable) is too long. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-16-17-50-58
.. gh-issue: 93353
.. nonce: JdpATx
.. section: Tests

regrtest now checks if a test leaks temporary files or directories if run
with -jN option. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-21-18-14
.. gh-issue: 84461
.. nonce: 9TAb26
.. section: Tests

``run_tests.py`` now handles cross compiling env vars correctly and pass
``HOSTRUNNER`` to regression tests.

..

.. date: 2022-06-08-22-32-56
.. gh-issue: 93616
.. nonce: e5Kkx2
.. section: Tests

``test_modulefinder`` now creates a temporary directory in
``ModuleFinderTest.setUp()`` instead of module scope.

..

.. date: 2022-06-08-14-17-59
.. gh-issue: 93575
.. nonce: Xb2LNB
.. section: Tests

Fix issue with test_unicode test_raiseMemError. The test case now use
``test.support.calcobjsize`` to calculate size of PyUnicode structs.
:func:`sys.getsizeof` may return different size when string has UTF-8
memory.

..

.. date: 2022-06-05-10-16-45
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: QMu7A8
.. section: Tests

WASI does not have a ``chmod(2)`` syscall. :func:`os.chmod` is now a dummy
function on WASI. Skip all tests that depend on working :func:`os.chmod`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-04-12-05-31
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: RSpjF7
.. section: Tests

Skip tests on WASI that require symlinks with absolute paths.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-16-26-04
.. gh-issue: 57539
.. nonce: HxWgYO
.. section: Tests

Increase calendar test coverage for
:meth:`calendar.LocaleTextCalendar.formatweekday`.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-14-18-37
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: 7iXVRK
.. section: Tests

Skip symlink tests on WASI. wasmtime uses ``openat2(2)`` with
``RESOLVE_BENEATH`` flag, which prevents symlinks with absolute paths.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-12-22-44
.. gh-issue: 89858
.. nonce: ftBvjE
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_embed`` for out-of-tree builds. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-23-07-15
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: Aki63_
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``test_imaplib.py``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-23-00-35
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: Y-vrWj
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``test_zipimport.py``

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-22-53-30
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: mIfdtz
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``test_py_compile.py``

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-22-43-11
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: 9HQb9e
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``test_sys_settrace.py``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-22-34-10
.. gh-issue: 92886
.. nonce: 1Lkt8S
.. section: Tests

Fixing tests that fail when running with optimizations (``-O``) in
``_test_multiprocessing.py``

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-05-51-06
.. gh-issue: 92670
.. nonce: 7L43Z_
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_shutil.TestCopy.test_copyfile_nonexistent_dir`` test on AIX as
the test uses a trailing slash to force the OS consider the path as a
directory, but on AIX the trailing slash has no effect and is considered as
a file.

..

.. date: 2022-05-08-15-40-41
.. gh-issue: 92514
.. nonce: Xbf5JY
.. section: Tests

Remove unused ``test.support.BasicTestRunner``. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. bpo: 47016
.. date: 2022-03-14-23-28-17
.. nonce: K-t2QX
.. section: Tests

Create a GitHub Actions workflow for verifying bundled pip and setuptools.
Patch by Illia Volochii and Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-20-12-43-44
.. gh-issue: 96761
.. nonce: IF29kR
.. section: Build

Fix the build process of clang compiler for :program:`_bootstrap_python` if
LTO optimization is applied. Patch by Matthias Görgens and Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2022-09-17-11-19-24
.. gh-issue: 96883
.. nonce: p_gr62
.. section: Build

``wasm32-emscripten`` builds for browsers now include
:mod:`concurrent.futures` for :mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`unittest.mock`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-12-18-34-51
.. gh-issue: 85936
.. nonce: tX4VCU
.. section: Build

CPython now uses the ThinLTO option as the default policy if the Clang
compiler accepts the flag. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2022-09-11-14-23-49
.. gh-issue: 96729
.. nonce: W4uBWL
.. section: Build

Ensure that Windows releases built with ``Tools\msi\buildrelease.bat`` are
upgradable to and from official Python releases.

..

.. date: 2022-08-26-11-50-03
.. gh-issue: 96269
.. nonce: x_J5h0
.. section: Build

Shared module targets now depend on new ``MODULE_DEPS`` variable, which
includes ``EXPORTSYMS``. This fixes a build order issue on unsupported AIX
platform.

..

.. date: 2022-08-26-11-09-11
.. gh-issue: 84461
.. nonce: Nsdn_R
.. section: Build

``wasm32-emscripten`` platform no longer builds :mod:`resource` module,
:func:`~os.getresuid`, :func:`~os.getresgid`, and their setters. The APIs
are stubs and not functional.

..

.. date: 2022-08-15-10-56-07
.. gh-issue: 95973
.. nonce: Bsswsc
.. section: Build

Add a new ``--with-dsymutil`` configure option to link debug information
in macOS. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2022-08-12-13-06-03
.. gh-issue: 90536
.. nonce: qMpF6p
.. section: Build

Use the BOLT post-link optimizer to improve performance, particularly on
medium-to-large applications.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-15-29-35
.. gh-issue: 93744
.. nonce: svRuqm
.. section: Build

Remove the ``configure --with-cxx-main`` build option: it didn't work for
many years. Remove the ``MAINCC`` variable from ``configure`` and
``Makefile``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-18-13-34
.. gh-issue: 94801
.. nonce: 9fREfy
.. section: Build

Fix a regression in ``configure`` script that caused some header checks to
ignore custom ``CPPFLAGS``. The regression was introduced in :gh:`94802`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-09-48-43
.. gh-issue: 95145
.. nonce: ZNS3dj
.. section: Build

wasm32-wasi builds no longer depend on WASIX's pthread stubs. Python now has
its own stubbed pthread API.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-08-59-35
.. gh-issue: 95174
.. nonce: g8woUW
.. section: Build

Python now detects missing ``dup`` function in WASI and works around some
missing :mod:`errno`, :mod:`select`, and :mod:`socket` constants.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-21-39-09
.. gh-issue: 95174
.. nonce: 7cYMZR
.. section: Build

Python now skips missing :mod:`socket` functions and methods on WASI. WASI
can only create sockets from existing fd / accept and has no netdb.

..

.. date: 2022-07-21-09-17-01
.. gh-issue: 95085
.. nonce: E9x2S_
.. section: Build

Platforms ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten`` and ``wasm32-unknown-wasi`` have
been promoted to :pep:`11` tier 3 platform support.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-11-13-26
.. gh-issue: 94847
.. nonce: s3Kr5p
.. section: Build

Fixed ``_decimal`` module build issue on GCC when compiling with LTO and
pydebug. Debug builds no longer force inlining of functions.

..

.. date: 2022-07-14-02-45-44
.. gh-issue: 94841
.. nonce: lLRTdf
.. section: Build

Fix the possible performance regression of :c:func:`PyObject_Free` compiled
with MSVC version 1932.

..

.. date: 2022-07-13-10-13-10
.. gh-issue: 94801
.. nonce: 3xUB24
.. section: Build

``configure`` now uses custom flags like ``ZLIB_CFLAGS`` and ``ZLIB_LIBS``
when searching for headers and libraries.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-13-39-18
.. gh-issue: 94773
.. nonce: koHKm5
.. section: Build

``deepfreeze.py`` now supports code object with frozensets that contain
incompatible, unsortable types.

..

.. date: 2022-07-08-10-28-23
.. gh-issue: 94682
.. nonce: ZtGt_0
.. section: Build

Build and test with OpenSSL 1.1.1q

..

.. date: 2022-06-30-17-18-23
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: EIOOla
.. section: Build

Dependencies of :mod:`readline` and :mod:`curses` module are now detected in
``configure`` script with ``pkg-config``. Only ``ncurses`` / ``ncursesw``
are detected automatically. The old ``curses`` library is not configured
automatically. Workaround for missing ``termcap`` or ``tinfo`` library has
been removed.

..

.. date: 2022-06-30-17-00-54
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: iiq5qD
.. section: Build

Fix building ``_ctypes`` extension without ``pkg-config``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-30-09-57-39
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: 9-pQyR
.. section: Build

``_dbm`` module dependencies are now detected by configure.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-08-58-31
.. gh-issue: 94404
.. nonce: 3MadM6
.. section: Build

``makesetup`` now works around an issue with sed on macOS and uses correct
CFLAGS for object files that end up in a shared extension. Module CFLAGS are
used before PY_STDMODULE_CFLAGS to avoid clashes with system headers.

..

.. date: 2022-06-28-09-42-10
.. gh-issue: 93939
.. nonce: _VWxKW
.. section: Build

C extension modules are now built by ``configure`` and ``make`` instead of
``distutils`` and ``setup.py``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-11-57-15
.. gh-issue: 93939
.. nonce: rv7s8W
.. section: Build

The ``2to3``, ``idle``, and ``pydoc`` scripts are now generated and
installed by ``Makefile`` instead of ``setup.py``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-25-23-25-47
.. gh-issue: 94280
.. nonce: YhEyW_
.. section: Build

Updated pegen regeneration script on Windows to find and use Python 3.9 or
higher.  Prior to this, pegen regeneration already required 3.9 or higher,
but the script may have used lower versions of Python.

..

.. date: 2022-06-08-14-28-03
.. gh-issue: 93584
.. nonce: 0xfHOK
.. section: Build

Address race condition in ``Makefile`` when installing a PGO build. All
``test`` and ``install`` targets now depend on ``all`` target.

..

.. date: 2022-06-04-12-53-53
.. gh-issue: 93491
.. nonce: ehM211
.. section: Build

``configure`` now detects and reports :pep:`11` support tiers.

..

.. date: 2022-05-31-18-04-58
.. gh-issue: 69093
.. nonce: 6lSa0C
.. section: Build

Fix ``Modules/Setup.stdlib.in`` rule for ``_sqlite3`` extension.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-13-56-00
.. gh-issue: 93207
.. nonce: B9Rubf
.. section: Build

``va_start()`` with two parameters, like ``va_start(args, format),`` is now
required to build Python. ``va_start()`` is no longer called with a single
parameter. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2022-05-25-05-46-00
.. gh-issue: 93202
.. nonce: T37jtj
.. section: Build

Python now always use the ``%zu`` and ``%zd`` printf formats to format a
:c:type:`size_t` or ``Py_ssize_t`` number. Building Python 3.12 requires a C11
compiler, so these printf formats are now always supported. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-12-10-19-15
.. gh-issue: 90473
.. nonce: -syvqK
.. section: Build

Disable pymalloc and increase stack size on ``wasm32-wasi``.

..

.. bpo: 34449
.. date: 2018-08-21-11-10-18
.. nonce: Z3qm3c
.. section: Build

Drop invalid compiler switch ``-fPIC`` for HP aCC on HP-UX. Patch by Michael
Osipov.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-20-00-28
.. gh-issue: 98360
.. nonce: O2m6YG
.. section: Windows

Fixes :mod:`multiprocessing` spawning child processes on Windows from a
virtual environment to ensure that child processes that also use
:mod:`multiprocessing` to spawn more children will recognize that they are
in a virtual environment.

..

.. date: 2022-10-19-19-35-37
.. gh-issue: 98414
.. nonce: FbHZuS
.. section: Windows

Fix :file:`py.exe` launcher handling of :samp:`-V:{<company>}/` option when
default preferences have been set in environment variables or configuration
files.

..

.. date: 2022-10-02-11-59-23
.. gh-issue: 97728
.. nonce: dIdlPE
.. section: Windows

Fix possible crashes caused by the use of uninitialized variables when pass
invalid arguments in :func:`os.system` on Windows and in Windows-specific
modules (like ``winreg``).

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-23-08-49
.. gh-issue: 90989
.. nonce: no89Q2
.. section: Windows

Made :ref:`launcher` install per-user by default (unless an all users
install already exists), and clarify some text in the installer.

..

.. date: 2022-09-29-22-27-04
.. gh-issue: 97649
.. nonce: bI7OQU
.. section: Windows

The ``Tools`` directory is no longer installed on Windows

..

.. date: 2022-09-23-15-40-04
.. gh-issue: 96965
.. nonce: CsnEGs
.. section: Windows

Update libffi to 3.4.3

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-00-11-33
.. gh-issue: 96577
.. nonce: kV4K_1
.. section: Windows

Fixes a potential buffer overrun in :mod:`!msilib`.

..

.. date: 2022-09-05-18-32-47
.. gh-issue: 96559
.. nonce: 561sUd
.. section: Windows

Fixes the Windows launcher not using the compatible interpretation of
default tags found in configuration files when no tag was passed to the
command.

..

.. date: 2022-08-30-12-01-51
.. gh-issue: 94781
.. nonce: OxO-Gr
.. section: Windows

Fix :file:`pcbuild.proj` to clean previous instances of output files in
``Python\deepfreeze`` and ``Python\frozen_modules`` directories on Windows.
Patch by Charlie Zhao.

..

.. date: 2022-08-26-00-11-18
.. gh-issue: 89545
.. nonce: zmJMY_
.. section: Windows

Updates :mod:`platform` code getting the Windows version to use native
Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) queries to determine OS version,
type, and architecture.

..

.. date: 2022-08-10-22-46-48
.. gh-issue: 95733
.. nonce: 2_urOp
.. section: Windows

Make certain requirements of the Windows Store package optional to allow
installing on earlier updates of Windows.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-18-47-54
.. gh-issue: 95656
.. nonce: VJ1d13
.. section: Windows

Enable the :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.enable_load_extension` :mod:`sqlite3`
API.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-01-12-27
.. gh-issue: 95587
.. nonce: Fvdv5q
.. section: Windows

Fixes some issues where the Windows installer would incorrectly detect
certain features of an existing install when upgrading.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-00-49-46
.. gh-issue: 94399
.. nonce: KvxHc0
.. section: Windows

Restores the behaviour of :ref:`launcher` for ``/usr/bin/env`` shebang
lines, which will now search :envvar:`PATH` for an executable matching the
given command. If none is found, the usual search process is used.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-14-18-33
.. gh-issue: 95445
.. nonce: mjrTaq
.. section: Windows

Fixes the unsuccessful removal of the HTML document directory when
uninstalling with Windows msi.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-20-21-38
.. gh-issue: 95359
.. nonce: ywMrgu
.. section: Windows

Fix :ref:`launcher` handling of :file:`py.ini` commands (it was incorrectly
expecting a ``py_`` prefix on keys) and crashes when reading per-user
configuration file.

..

.. date: 2022-07-26-20-33-12
.. gh-issue: 95285
.. nonce: w6fa22
.. section: Windows

Fix :ref:`launcher` handling of command lines where it is only passed a
short executable name.

..

.. date: 2022-07-16-16-18-32
.. gh-issue: 90844
.. nonce: vwITT3
.. section: Windows

Allow virtual environments to correctly launch when they have spaces in the
path.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-20-45-43
.. gh-issue: 94772
.. nonce: uNMmdG
.. section: Windows

Fix incorrect handling of shebang lines in py.exe launcher

..

.. date: 2022-06-20-22-32-14
.. gh-issue: 94018
.. nonce: bycC3A
.. section: Windows

:mod:`zipfile` will now remove trailing spaces from path components when
extracting files on Windows.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-01-03-52
.. gh-issue: 93824
.. nonce: mR4mxu
.. section: Windows

Drag and drop of files onto Python files in Windows Explorer has been
enabled for Windows ARM64.

..

.. date: 2022-05-28-19-36-13
.. gh-issue: 43414
.. nonce: NGMJ3g
.. section: Windows

:func:`os.get_terminal_size` now attempts to read the size from any provided
handle, rather than only supporting file descriptors 0, 1 and 2.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-21-44-25
.. gh-issue: 92817
.. nonce: Jrf-Kv
.. section: Windows

Ensures that :file:`py.exe` will prefer an active virtual environment over
default tags specified with environment variables or through a
:file:`py.ini` file.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-14-01-30
.. gh-issue: 92984
.. nonce: Dsxnlr
.. section: Windows

Explicitly disable incremental linking for non-Debug builds

..

.. date: 2022-05-16-11-45-06
.. gh-issue: 92841
.. nonce: NQx107
.. section: Windows

:mod:`asyncio` no longer throws ``RuntimeError: Event loop is closed`` on
interpreter exit after asynchronous socket activity. Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. bpo: 46907
.. date: 2022-05-05-06-27-59
.. nonce: IW-uvT
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.38.4.

..

.. date: 2022-04-12-18-35-20
.. gh-issue: 91061
.. nonce: x40hSK
.. section: Windows

Accept os.PathLike for the argument to winsound.PlaySound

..

.. bpo: 42658
.. date: 2022-03-20-15-47-35
.. nonce: 16eXtb
.. section: Windows

Support native Windows case-insensitive path comparisons by using
``LCMapStringEx`` instead of :func:`str.lower` in :func:`ntpath.normcase`.
Add ``LCMapStringEx`` to the :mod:`!_winapi` module.

..

.. bpo: 38704
.. date: 2020-01-10-23-33-03
.. nonce: 2Idtdn
.. section: Windows

Prevent installation on unsupported Windows versions.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-15-26-58
.. gh-issue: 97897
.. nonce: Rf-C6u
.. section: macOS

The macOS 13 SDK includes support for the ``mkfifoat`` and ``mknodat``
system calls. Using the ``dir_fd`` option with either :func:`os.mkfifo` or
:func:`os.mknod` could result in a segfault if cpython is built with the
macOS 13 SDK but run on an earlier version of macOS. Prevent this by adding
runtime support for detection of these system calls ("weaklinking") as is
done for other newer syscalls on macOS.

..

.. date: 2022-10-15-21-20-40
.. gh-issue: 97527
.. nonce: otAHJM
.. section: IDLE

Fix a bug in the previous bugfix that caused IDLE to not start when run with
3.10.8, 3.12.0a1, and at least Microsoft Python 3.10.2288.0 installed
without the Lib/test package.  3.11.0 was never affected.

..

.. date: 2022-08-04-20-07-51
.. gh-issue: 65802
.. nonce: xnThWe
.. section: IDLE

Document handling of extensions in Save As dialogs.

..

.. date: 2022-08-01-23-31-48
.. gh-issue: 95191
.. nonce: U7vryB
.. section: IDLE

Include prompts when saving Shell (interactive input and output).

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-22-15-14
.. gh-issue: 95511
.. nonce: WX6PmB
.. section: IDLE

Fix the Shell context menu copy-with-prompts bug of copying an extra line
when one selects whole lines.

..

.. date: 2022-07-30-15-10-39
.. gh-issue: 95471
.. nonce: z3scVG
.. section: IDLE

In the Edit menu, move ``Select All`` and add a new separator.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-11-08-52
.. gh-issue: 95411
.. nonce: dazlqH
.. section: IDLE

Enable using IDLE's module browser with .pyw files.

..

.. date: 2022-07-28-18-56-57
.. gh-issue: 89610
.. nonce: hcosiM
.. section: IDLE

Add .pyi as a recognized extension for IDLE on macOS.    This allows opening
stub files by double clicking on them in the Finder.

..

.. date: 2022-10-07-22-06-11
.. gh-issue: 68686
.. nonce: 6KNIQ4
.. section: Tools/Demos

Remove ptags and eptags scripts.

..

.. date: 2022-09-30-18-35-11
.. gh-issue: 97681
.. nonce: -KO1Ba
.. section: Tools/Demos

Remove the ``Tools/demo/`` directory which contained old demo scripts. A
copy can be found in the `old-demos project
<https://github.com/gvanrossum/old-demos>`_.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-30-14-30-12
.. gh-issue: 97669
.. nonce: gvbgcg
.. section: Tools/Demos

Remove outdated example scripts of the ``Tools/scripts/`` directory. A copy
can be found in the `old-demos project
<https://github.com/gvanrossum/old-demos>`_. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-08-29-17-25-13
.. gh-issue: 95853
.. nonce: Ce17cT
.. section: Tools/Demos

The ``wasm_build.py`` script now pre-builds Emscripten ports, checks for
broken EMSDK versions, and warns about pkg-config env vars.

..

.. date: 2022-08-10-17-08-43
.. gh-issue: 95853
.. nonce: HCjC2m
.. section: Tools/Demos

The new tool ``Tools/wasm/wasm_builder.py`` automates configure, compile,
and test steps for building CPython on WebAssembly platforms.

..

.. date: 2022-08-05-23-25-59
.. gh-issue: 95731
.. nonce: N2KohU
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix handling of module docstrings in :file:`Tools/i18n/pygettext.py`.

..

.. date: 2022-07-04-10-02-02
.. gh-issue: 93939
.. nonce: U6sW6H
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add script ``Tools/scripts/check_modules.py`` to check and validate builtin
and shared extension modules. The script also handles ``Modules/Setup`` and
will eventually replace ``setup.py``.

..

.. date: 2022-07-04-01-37-42
.. gh-issue: 94538
.. nonce: 1rgy1Y
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix Argument Clinic output to custom file destinations. Patch by Erlend E.
Aasland.

..

.. date: 2022-06-29-22-47-11
.. gh-issue: 94430
.. nonce: hdov8L
.. section: Tools/Demos

Allow parameters named ``module`` and ``self`` with custom C names in
Argument Clinic. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland

..

.. date: 2022-06-19-14-56-33
.. gh-issue: 86087
.. nonce: R8MkRy
.. section: Tools/Demos

The ``Tools/scripts/parseentities.py`` script used to parse HTML4 entities
has been removed.

..

.. date: 2022-10-18-16-16-27
.. gh-issue: 98393
.. nonce: 55u4BF
.. section: C API

The :c:func:`PyUnicode_FSDecoder` function no longer accepts bytes-like
paths, like :class:`bytearray` and :class:`memoryview` types: only the exact
:class:`bytes` type is accepted for bytes strings. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-10-43-32
.. gh-issue: 91051
.. nonce: ODDRsQ
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyType_Watch` and related APIs to allow callbacks on
:c:func:`PyType_Modified`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-03-20-33-24
.. gh-issue: 95756
.. nonce: SSmXlG
.. section: C API

Lazily create and cache ``co_`` attributes for better performance for code
getters.

..

.. date: 2022-09-20-01-04-57
.. gh-issue: 96512
.. nonce: msZTjF
.. section: C API

Configuration for the :ref:`integer string conversion length limitation
<int_max_str_digits>` now lives in the PyConfig C API struct.

..

.. date: 2022-08-16-16-54-42
.. gh-issue: 95589
.. nonce: 6xE1ar
.. section: C API

Extensions classes that set ``tp_dictoffset`` and ``tp_weaklistoffset`` lose
the support for multiple inheritance, but are now safe. Extension classes
should use :c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_DICT` and
:c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_WEAKREF` instead.

..

.. date: 2022-08-08-14-36-31
.. gh-issue: 95781
.. nonce: W_G8YW
.. section: C API

An unrecognized format character in :c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat` and
:c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormatV` now sets a :exc:`SystemError`. In previous
versions it caused all the rest of the format string to be copied as-is to
the result string, and any extra arguments discarded.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-14-39-08
.. gh-issue: 92678
.. nonce: ozFTEx
.. section: C API

Restore the 3.10 behavior for multiple inheritance of C extension classes
that store their dictionary at the end of the struct.

..

.. date: 2022-08-03-13-01-57
.. gh-issue: 92678
.. nonce: DLwONN
.. section: C API

Support C extensions using managed dictionaries by setting the
``Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_DICT`` flag.

..

.. date: 2022-08-01-16-21-39
.. gh-issue: 93274
.. nonce: QoDHEu
.. section: C API

API for implementing vectorcall (:c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_VECTORCALL`,
:c:func:`PyVectorcall_NARGS` and :c:func:`PyVectorcall_Call`) was added to
the limited API and stable ABI.

..

.. date: 2022-07-31-21-58-27
.. gh-issue: 95504
.. nonce: wy7B1F
.. section: C API

Fix sign placement when specifying width or precision in
:c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat` and :c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormatV`. Patch by
Philip Georgi.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-15-24-45
.. gh-issue: 93012
.. nonce: -DdGEy
.. section: C API

The :c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_VECTORCALL` flag is now removed from a class
when the class's :py:meth:`~object.__call__` method is reassigned. This
makes vectorcall safe to use with mutable types (i.e. heap types without the
:const:`immutable <Py_TPFLAGS_IMMUTABLETYPE>` flag). Mutable types that do
not override :c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_call` now inherit the
:c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_VECTORCALL` flag.

..

.. date: 2022-07-29-10-41-59
.. gh-issue: 95388
.. nonce: aiRSgr
.. section: C API

Creating :c:macro:`immutable types <Py_TPFLAGS_IMMUTABLETYPE>` with mutable
bases is deprecated and is planned to be disabled in Python 3.14.

..

.. date: 2022-07-25-15-54-27
.. gh-issue: 92678
.. nonce: ziZpxz
.. section: C API

Adds unstable C-API functions ``_PyObject_VisitManagedDict`` and
``_PyObject_ClearManagedDict`` to allow C extensions to allow the VM to
manage their object's dictionaries.

..

.. date: 2022-07-19-22-37-40
.. gh-issue: 94936
.. nonce: LGlmKv
.. section: C API

Added :c:func:`PyCode_GetVarnames`, :c:func:`PyCode_GetCellvars` and
:c:func:`PyCode_GetFreevars` for accessing ``co_varnames``, ``co_cellvars``
and ``co_freevars`` respectively via the C API.

..

.. date: 2022-07-17-18-21-40
.. gh-issue: 94930
.. nonce: gPFGDL
.. section: C API

Fix ``SystemError`` raised when :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords` is
used with ``#`` in ``(...)`` but without ``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN`` defined.

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-17-39-32
.. gh-issue: 94731
.. nonce: 9CPJNU
.. section: C API

Python again uses C-style casts for most casting operations when compiled
with C++. This may trigger compiler warnings, if they are enabled with e.g.
``-Wold-style-cast`` or ``-Wzero-as-null-pointer-constant`` options for
``g++``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-17-13-41-38
.. gh-issue: 93937
.. nonce: uKVTEh
.. section: C API

The following frame functions and type are now directly available with
``#include <Python.h>``, it's no longer needed to add ``#include
<frameobject.h>``:

* :c:func:`PyFrame_Check`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetBack`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetBuiltins`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetGenerator`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetGlobals`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetLasti`
* :c:func:`PyFrame_GetLocals`
* :c:type:`PyFrame_Type`

Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-13-21-37-31
.. gh-issue: 91321
.. nonce: DgJFvS
.. section: C API

Fix the compatibility of the Python C API with C++ older than C++11. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-23-41-48
.. gh-issue: 91731
.. nonce: fhYUQG
.. section: C API

Avoid defining the ``static_assert`` when compiling with C++ 11, where this
is a keyword and redefining it can lead to undefined behavior. Patch by
Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-10-16-50-27
.. gh-issue: 89546
.. nonce: mX1f10
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyType_FromMetaclass` (and other ``PyType_From*`` functions) now
check that offsets and the base class's
:c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_basicsize` fit in the new class's
``tp_basicsize``.

..

.. date: 2022-06-06-16-04-14
.. gh-issue: 93503
.. nonce: MHJTu8
.. section: C API

Add two new public functions to the public C-API,
:c:func:`PyEval_SetProfileAllThreads` and
:c:func:`PyEval_SetTraceAllThreads`, that allow to set tracing and profiling
functions in all running threads in addition to the calling one. Also, two
analogous functions to the :mod:`threading` module
(:func:`threading.setprofile_all_threads` and
:func:`threading.settrace_all_threads`) that allow to do the same from
Python. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2022-06-04-13-15-41
.. gh-issue: 93442
.. nonce: 4M4NDb
.. section: C API

Add C++ overloads for _Py_CAST_impl() to handle 0/NULL.  This will allow C++
extensions that pass 0 or NULL to macros using _Py_CAST() to continue to
compile.

..

.. date: 2022-06-03-14-54-41
.. gh-issue: 93466
.. nonce: DDtH0X
.. section: C API

Slot IDs in PyType_Spec may not be repeated. The documentation was updated
to mention this. For some cases of repeated slots, PyType_FromSpec and
related functions will now raise an exception.

..

.. date: 2022-05-23-15-22-18
.. gh-issue: 92898
.. nonce: Qjc9d3
.. section: C API

Fix C++ compiler warnings when casting function arguments to ``PyObject*``.
Patch by Serge Guelton.

..

.. date: 2022-05-23-13-33-18
.. gh-issue: 93103
.. nonce: ooD3Eb
.. section: C API

Deprecate global configuration variables, like
:c:var:`Py_IgnoreEnvironmentFlag`, in the documentation: the
:c:func:`Py_InitializeFromConfig` API should be instead. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-23-12-31-04
.. gh-issue: 77782
.. nonce: ugC8dn
.. section: C API

Deprecate global configuration variable like
:c:var:`Py_IgnoreEnvironmentFlag`: the :c:func:`Py_InitializeFromConfig` API
should be instead. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-19-18-05-51
.. gh-issue: 92913
.. nonce: Ass1Hv
.. section: C API

Ensures changes to :c:member:`PyConfig.module_search_paths` are ignored
unless :c:member:`PyConfig.module_search_paths_set` is set

..

.. date: 2022-05-13-18-17-48
.. gh-issue: 92781
.. nonce: TVDr3-
.. section: C API

Avoid mixing declarations and code in the C API to fix the compiler warning:
"ISO C90 forbids mixed declarations and code"
[-Werror=declaration-after-statement]. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-02-33-10
.. gh-issue: 92651
.. nonce: FIXLf0
.. section: C API

Remove the ``token.h`` header file. There was never any public tokenizer C
API. The ``token.h`` header file was only designed to be used by Python
internals. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-10-12-35-42
.. gh-issue: 92536
.. nonce: cAoRCZ
.. section: C API

Remove legacy Unicode APIs based on ``Py_UNICODE*``.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-23-16-38
.. gh-issue: 85858
.. nonce: VIcNDL
.. section: C API

Remove the ``PyUnicode_InternImmortal()`` function and the
``SSTATE_INTERNED_IMMORTAL`` macro. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-05-03-19-35-37
.. gh-issue: 92193
.. nonce: 61VoFL
.. section: C API

Add new function :c:func:`PyFunction_SetVectorcall` to the C API which sets
the vectorcall field of a given :c:type:`PyFunctionObject`.

Warning: extensions using this API must preserve the behavior of the
unaltered function!

..

.. date: 2022-04-13-16-10-55
.. gh-issue: 59121
.. nonce: -B7mKp
.. section: C API

Fixed an assert that prevented ``PyRun_InteractiveOne`` from providing
tracebacks when parsing from the provided FD.

..

.. bpo: 45383
.. date: 2021-10-05-21-59-43
.. nonce: TVClgf
.. section: C API

The :c:func:`PyType_FromSpec` API will now find and use a metaclass based on
the provided bases. An error will be raised if there is a metaclass
conflict.
