.. date: 2024-01-02-19-52-23
.. gh-issue: 113659
.. nonce: DkmnQc
.. release date: 2024-02-06
.. section: Security

Skip ``.pth`` files with names starting with a dot or hidden file attribute.

..

.. date: 2024-02-03-04-07-18
.. gh-issue: 114887
.. nonce: uLSFmN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Changed socket type validation in
:meth:`~asyncio.loop.create_datagram_endpoint` to accept all non-stream
sockets. This fixes a regression in compatibility with raw sockets.

..

.. date: 2024-01-21-17-29-32
.. gh-issue: 114388
.. nonce: UVGO4K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a :exc:`RuntimeWarning` emitted when assign an integer-like value that
is not an instance of :class:`int` to an attribute that corresponds to a C
struct member of :ref:`type <PyMemberDef-types>` T_UINT and T_ULONG. Fix a
double :exc:`RuntimeWarning` emitted when assign a negative integer value to
an attribute that corresponds to a C struct member of type T_UINT.

..

.. date: 2024-01-04-17-15-30
.. gh-issue: 113703
.. nonce: Zsk0pY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a regression in the :mod:`codeop` module that was causing it to
incorrectly identify incomplete f-strings. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-01-03-12-19-37
.. gh-issue: 89811
.. nonce: cZOj6d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check for a valid ``tp_version_tag`` before performing bytecode
specializations that rely on this value being usable.

..

.. date: 2024-01-01-00-07-02
.. gh-issue: 113602
.. nonce: cWuTzk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an error that was causing the parser to try to overwrite existing errors
and crashing in the process. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-12-20-18-27-11
.. gh-issue: 113297
.. nonce: BZyAI_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault in the compiler on with statement with 19 context managers.

..

.. date: 2023-12-13-11-45-53
.. gh-issue: 106905
.. nonce: 5dslTN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use per AST-parser state rather than global state to track recursion depth
within the AST parser to prevent potential race condition due to
simultaneous parsing.

The issue primarily showed up in 3.11 by multithreaded users of
:func:`ast.parse`.  In 3.12 a change to when garbage collection can be
triggered prevented the race condition from occurring.

..

.. date: 2023-12-11-00-50-00
.. gh-issue: 112943
.. nonce: RHNZie
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly compute end column offsets for multiline tokens in the
:mod:`tokenize` module. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-12-05-20-41-58
.. gh-issue: 112716
.. nonce: hOcx0Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix SystemError in the ``import`` statement and in ``__reduce__()`` methods
of builtin types when ``__builtins__`` is not a dict.

..

.. date: 2022-07-07-05-37-53
.. gh-issue: 94606
.. nonce: hojJ54
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix UnicodeEncodeError when :func:`email.message.get_payload` reads a
message with a Unicode surrogate character and the message content is not
well-formed for surrogateescape encoding. Patch by Sidney Markowitz.

..

.. date: 2024-02-03-17-54-17
.. gh-issue: 114965
.. nonce: gHksCK
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 24.0

..

.. date: 2024-02-03-16-59-25
.. gh-issue: 114959
.. nonce: dCfAG2
.. section: Library

:mod:`tarfile` no longer ignores errors when trying to extract a directory
on top of a file.

..

.. date: 2024-01-31-20-07-11
.. gh-issue: 109475
.. nonce: lmTb9S
.. section: Library

Fix support of explicit option value "--" in :mod:`argparse` (e.g.
``--option=--``).

..

.. date: 2024-01-30-15-34-08
.. gh-issue: 110190
.. nonce: Z5PQQX
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes structs with array on Windows ARM64 platform by setting
``MAX_STRUCT_SIZE`` to 32 in stgdict. Patch by Diego Russo

..

.. date: 2024-01-27-20-11-24
.. gh-issue: 113280
.. nonce: CZPQMf
.. section: Library

Fix a leak of open socket in rare cases when error occurred in
:class:`ssl.SSLSocket` creation.

..

.. date: 2024-01-26-16-46-21
.. gh-issue: 77749
.. nonce: NY_7TS
.. section: Library

:meth:`email.policy.EmailPolicy.fold` now always encodes non-ASCII
characters in headers if :attr:`~email.policy.EmailPolicy.utf8` is false.

..

.. date: 2024-01-23-21-20-40
.. gh-issue: 114492
.. nonce: vKxl5o
.. section: Library

Make the result of :func:`termios.tcgetattr` reproducible on Alpine Linux.
Previously it could leave a random garbage in some fields.

..

.. date: 2024-01-23-11-04-21
.. gh-issue: 113267
.. nonce: xe_Pxe
.. section: Library

Revert changes in :gh:`106584` which made calls of ``TestResult`` methods
``startTest()`` and ``stopTest()`` unbalanced.

..

.. date: 2024-01-22-12-10-34
.. gh-issue: 75128
.. nonce: 4FGlRS
.. section: Library

Ignore an :exc:`OSError` in :meth:`asyncio.BaseEventLoop.create_server` when
IPv6 is available but the interface cannot actually support it.

..

.. date: 2024-01-21-16-32-55
.. gh-issue: 114257
.. nonce: bCFld5
.. section: Library

Dismiss the :exc:`FileNotFound` error in :func:`ctypes.util.find_library`
and just return ``None`` on Linux.

..

.. date: 2024-01-19-15-48-06
.. gh-issue: 114328
.. nonce: hixxW3
.. section: Library

The :func:`tty.setcbreak` and new :func:`tty.cfmakecbreak` no longer clears
the terminal input ICRLF flag. This fixes a regression introduced in 3.12
that no longer matched how OSes define cbreak mode in their ``stty(1)``
manual pages.

..

.. date: 2024-01-18-22-29-28
.. gh-issue: 101438
.. nonce: 1-uUi_
.. section: Library

Avoid reference cycle in ElementTree.iterparse. The iterator returned by
``ElementTree.iterparse`` may hold on to a file descriptor. The reference
cycle prevented prompt clean-up of the file descriptor if the returned
iterator was not exhausted.

..

.. date: 2024-01-17-18-53-51
.. gh-issue: 104522
.. nonce: 3NyDf4
.. section: Library

:exc:`OSError` raised when run a subprocess now only has *filename*
attribute set to *cwd* if the error was caused by a failed attempt to change
the current directory.

..

.. date: 2024-01-16-15-59-06
.. gh-issue: 114149
.. nonce: LJ8IPm
.. section: Library

Enum: correctly handle tuple subclasses in custom ``__new__``.

..

.. date: 2024-01-15-18-42-44
.. gh-issue: 109534
.. nonce: wYaLMZ
.. section: Library

Fix a reference leak in
:class:`asyncio.selector_events.BaseSelectorEventLoop` when SSL handshakes
fail. Patch contributed by Jamie Phan.

..

.. date: 2024-01-15-12-12-54
.. gh-issue: 114077
.. nonce: KcVnfj
.. section: Library

Fix possible :exc:`OverflowError` in :meth:`socket.socket.sendfile` when
pass *count* larger than 2 GiB on 32-bit platform.

..

.. date: 2024-01-13-11-34-29
.. gh-issue: 114014
.. nonce: WRHifN
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in :class:`fractions.Fraction` where an invalid string using
``d`` in the decimals part creates a different error compared to other
invalid letters/characters. Patch by Jeremiah Gabriel Pascual.

..

.. date: 2024-01-11-20-47-49
.. gh-issue: 113951
.. nonce: AzlqFK
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of ``tag_unbind()`` methods of :class:`tkinter.Text` and
:class:`tkinter.Canvas` classes with three arguments. Previously,
``widget.tag_unbind(tag, sequence, funcid)`` destroyed the current binding
for *sequence*, leaving *sequence* unbound, and deleted the *funcid*
command. Now it removes only *funcid* from the binding for *sequence*,
keeping other commands, and deletes the *funcid* command. It leaves
*sequence* unbound only if *funcid* was the last bound command.

..

.. date: 2024-01-10-12-03-38
.. gh-issue: 113877
.. nonce: RxKlrQ
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tkinter` method ``winfo_pathname()`` on 64-bit Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-01-09-08-59-43
.. gh-issue: 113661
.. nonce: asvXSx
.. section: Library

unittest runner: Don't exit 5 if tests were skipped. The intention of
exiting 5 was to detect issues where the test suite wasn't discovered at
all. If we skipped tests, it was correctly discovered.

..

.. date: 2024-01-08-14-57-09
.. gh-issue: 113781
.. nonce: IoTnwi
.. section: Library

Silence unraisable AttributeError when warnings are emitted during Python
finalization.

..

.. date: 2024-01-07-00-56-41
.. gh-issue: 112932
.. nonce: OfhUu7
.. section: Library

Restore the ability for :mod:`zipfile` to ``extractall`` from zip files with
a "/" directory entry in them as is commonly added to zips by some wiki or
bug tracker data exporters.

..

.. date: 2024-01-05-12-42-07
.. gh-issue: 113594
.. nonce: 4t8HiR
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`UnicodeEncodeError` in :mod:`email` when re-fold lines that
contain unknown-8bit encoded part followed by non-unknown-8bit encoded part.

..

.. date: 2024-01-03-14-19-26
.. gh-issue: 113538
.. nonce: ahuBCo
.. section: Library

In :meth:`asyncio.StreamReaderProtocol.connection_made`, there is callback
that logs an error if the task wrapping the "connected callback" fails. This
callback would itself fail if the task was cancelled. Prevent this by
checking whether the task was cancelled first. If so, close the transport
but don't log an error.

..

.. date: 2024-01-01-13-26-02
.. gh-issue: 85567
.. nonce: K4U15m
.. section: Library

Fix resource warnings for unclosed files in :mod:`pickle` and
:mod:`pickletools` command line interfaces.

..

.. date: 2023-12-29-17-46-06
.. gh-issue: 101225
.. nonce: QaEyxF
.. section: Library

Increase the backlog for :class:`multiprocessing.connection.Listener`
objects created by :mod:`multiprocessing.manager` and
:mod:`multiprocessing.resource_sharer` to significantly reduce the risk of
getting a connection refused error when creating a
:class:`multiprocessing.connection.Connection` to them.

..

.. date: 2023-12-28-14-36-20
.. gh-issue: 113543
.. nonce: 2iWkOR
.. section: Library

Make sure that ``webbrowser.MacOSXOSAScript`` sends ``webbrowser.open``
audit event.

..

.. date: 2023-12-23-16-51-17
.. gh-issue: 113028
.. nonce: 3Jmdoj
.. section: Library

When a second reference to a string appears in the input to :mod:`pickle`,
and the Python implementation is in use, we are guaranteed that a single
copy gets pickled and a single object is shared when reloaded. Previously,
in protocol 0, when a string contained certain characters (e.g. newline) it
resulted in duplicate objects.

..

.. date: 2023-12-23-16-10-07
.. gh-issue: 113421
.. nonce: w7vs08
.. section: Library

Fix multiprocessing logger for ``%(filename)s``.

..

.. date: 2023-12-23-13-10-42
.. gh-issue: 111784
.. nonce: Nb4L1j
.. section: Library

Fix segfaults in the ``_elementtree`` module. Fix first segfault during
deallocation of ``_elementtree.XMLParser`` instances by keeping strong
reference to ``pyexpat`` module in module state for capsule lifetime. Fix
second segfault which happens in the same deallocation process  by keeping
strong reference to ``_elementtree`` module in ``XMLParser`` structure for
``_elementtree`` module lifetime.

..

.. date: 2023-12-22-20-49-52
.. gh-issue: 113407
.. nonce: C_O13_
.. section: Library

Fix import of :mod:`unittest.mock` when CPython is built without docstrings.

..

.. date: 2023-12-22-11-30-57
.. gh-issue: 113320
.. nonce: Vp5suS
.. section: Library

Fix regression in Python 3.12 where :class:`~typing.Protocol` classes that
were not marked as :func:`runtime-checkable <typing.runtime_checkable>`
would be unnecessarily introspected, potentially causing exceptions to be
raised if the protocol had problematic members. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-12-21-14-55-06
.. gh-issue: 113358
.. nonce: nRkiSL
.. section: Library

Fix rendering tracebacks for exceptions with a broken ``__getattr__``.

..

.. date: 2023-12-20-21-18-51
.. gh-issue: 113214
.. nonce: JcV9Mn
.. section: Library

Fix an ``AttributeError`` during asyncio SSL protocol aborts in SSL-over-SSL
scenarios.

..

.. date: 2023-12-18-09-47-54
.. gh-issue: 113246
.. nonce: em930H
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 23.3.2.

..

.. date: 2023-12-16-01-10-47
.. gh-issue: 113199
.. nonce: oDjnjL
.. section: Library

Make ``http.client.HTTPResponse.read1`` and
``http.client.HTTPResponse.readline`` close IO after reading all data when
content length is known. Patch by Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-12-15-20-29-49
.. gh-issue: 113188
.. nonce: AvoraB
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`shutil.copymode` and :func:`shutil.copystat` on Windows.
Previously they worked differenly if *dst* is a symbolic link: they modified
the permission bits of *dst* itself rather than the file it points to if
*follow_symlinks* is true or *src* is not a symbolic link, and did not
modify the permission bits if *follow_symlinks* is false and *src* is a
symbolic link.

..

.. date: 2023-12-15-12-35-28
.. gh-issue: 61648
.. nonce: G-4pz0
.. section: Library

Detect line numbers of properties in doctests.

..

.. date: 2023-12-12-20-15-57
.. gh-issue: 112559
.. nonce: IgXkje
.. section: Library

:func:`signal.signal` and :func:`signal.getsignal` no longer call ``repr``
on callable handlers. :func:`asyncio.run` and :meth:`asyncio.Runner.run` no
longer call ``repr`` on the task results. Patch by Yilei Yang.

..

.. date: 2023-12-11-14-12-46
.. gh-issue: 110190
.. nonce: e0iEUa
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes structs with array on PPC64LE platform by setting
``MAX_STRUCT_SIZE`` to 64 in stgdict. Patch by Diego Russo.

..

.. date: 2023-12-08-11-52-08
.. gh-issue: 79429
.. nonce: Nf9VK2
.. section: Library

Ignore FileNotFoundError when remove a temporary directory in the
multiprocessing finalizer.

..

.. date: 2023-12-01-16-09-59
.. gh-issue: 81194
.. nonce: FFad1c
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :func:`socket.if_indextoname` with specific value (UINT_MAX).
Fix an integer overflow in :func:`socket.if_indextoname` on 64-bit
non-Windows platforms.

..

.. date: 2023-11-24-19-08-50
.. gh-issue: 112343
.. nonce: RarGFC
.. section: Library

Improve handling of pdb convenience variables to avoid replacing string
contents.

..

.. date: 2023-11-02-10-13-31
.. gh-issue: 111615
.. nonce: 3SMixi
.. section: Library

Fix a regression caused by a fix to gh-93162 whereby you couldn't configure
a :class:`QueueHandler` without specifying handlers.

..

.. date: 2023-10-23-18-42-26
.. gh-issue: 111049
.. nonce: Ys7-o_
.. section: Library

Fix crash during garbage collection of the :class:`io.BytesIO` buffer
object.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-11-09-30
.. gh-issue: 110345
.. nonce: fZU1ud
.. section: Library

Show the Tcl/Tk patchlevel (rather than version) in :meth:`tkinter._test`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-13-15-51
.. gh-issue: 109858
.. nonce: 43e2dg
.. section: Library

Protect :mod:`zipfile` from "quoted-overlap" zipbomb. It now raises
BadZipFile when try to read an entry that overlaps with other entry or
central directory.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-02-11-14
.. gh-issue: 114440
.. nonce: b2TrqG
.. section: Library

On Windows, closing the connection writer when cleaning up a broken
:class:`multiprocessing.Queue` queue is now done for all queues, rather than
only in :mod:`concurrent.futures` manager thread. This can prevent a
deadlock when a ``multiprocessing`` worker process terminates without
cleaning up. This completes the backport of patches by Victor Stinner and
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-22-17-45
.. gh-issue: 38807
.. nonce: m9McRN
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :mod:`trace`. Instead of checking if a directory
exists and creating it, directly call :func:`os.makedirs` with the kwarg
``exist_ok=True``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-12-28-26
.. gh-issue: 75705
.. nonce: aB2-Ww
.. section: Library

Set unixfrom envelope in :class:`mailbox.mbox` and :class:`mailbox.MMDF`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-14-26-56
.. gh-issue: 106233
.. nonce: Aqw2HI
.. section: Library

Fix stacklevel in ``InvalidTZPathWarning`` during :mod:`zoneinfo` module
import.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-18-30-11
.. gh-issue: 105102
.. nonce: SnpK04
.. section: Library

Allow :class:`ctypes.Union` to be nested in :class:`ctypes.Structure` when
the system endianness is the opposite of the classes.

..

.. date: 2023-05-08-09-30-00
.. gh-issue: 104282
.. nonce: h4c6Eb
.. section: Library

Fix null pointer dereference in :func:`lzma._decode_filter_properties` due
to improper handling of BCJ filters with properties of zero length. Patch by
Radislav Chugunov.

..

.. date: 2023-03-08-00-02-30
.. gh-issue: 102512
.. nonce: LiugDr
.. section: Library

When :func:`os.fork` is called from a foreign thread (aka ``_DummyThread``),
the type of the thread in a child process is changed to ``_MainThread``.
Also changed its name and daemonic status, it can be now joined.

..

.. bpo: 35928
.. date: 2020-10-03-23-47-28
.. nonce: E0iPAa
.. section: Library

:class:`io.TextIOWrapper` now correctly handles the decoding buffer after
``read()`` and ``write()``.

..

.. bpo: 26791
.. date: 2020-08-06-14-43-55
.. nonce: KxoEfO
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.move` now moves a symlink into a directory when that directory
is the target of the symlink.  This provides the same behavior as the mv
shell command.  The previous behavior raised an exception.  Patch by Jeffrey
Kintscher.

..

.. bpo: 36959
.. date: 2019-05-18-15-50-14
.. nonce: ew6WZ4
.. section: Library

Fix some error messages for invalid ISO format string combinations in
``strptime()`` that referred to directives not contained in the format
string. Patch by Gordon P. Hemsley.

..

.. bpo: 18060
.. date: 2019-05-17-07-22-33
.. nonce: 5mqTQM
.. section: Library

Fixed a class inheritance issue that can cause segfaults when deriving two
or more levels of subclasses from a base class of Structure or Union.

..

.. date: 2023-10-23-23-43-43
.. gh-issue: 110746
.. nonce: yg77IE
.. section: Documentation

Improved markup for valid options/values for methods ttk.treeview.column and
ttk.treeview.heading, and for Layouts.

..

.. date: 2023-08-01-13-11-39
.. gh-issue: 95649
.. nonce: F4KhPS
.. section: Documentation

Document that the :mod:`asyncio` module contains code taken from `v0.16.0 of
the uvloop project <https://github.com/MagicStack/uvloop/tree/v0.16.0>`_, as
well as the required MIT licensing information.

..

.. date: 2023-12-09-21-27-46
.. gh-issue: 109980
.. nonce: y--500
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_tarfile_vs_tar`` in ``test_shutil`` for macOS, where system tar
can include more information in the archive than :mod:`shutil.make_archive`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-05-04-15
.. gh-issue: 105089
.. nonce: KaZFtU
.. section: Tests

Fix
``test.test_zipfile.test_core.TestWithDirectory.test_create_directory_with_write``
test in AIX by doing a bitwise AND of 0xFFFF on mode , so that it will be in
sync with ``zinfo.external_attr``

..

.. bpo: 40648
.. date: 2020-05-16-18-00-21
.. nonce: p2uPqy
.. section: Tests

Test modes that file can get with chmod() on Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-12-21-05-35-06
.. gh-issue: 112305
.. nonce: VfqQPx
.. section: Build

Fixed the ``check-clean-src`` step performed on out of tree builds to detect
errant ``$(srcdir)/Python/frozen_modules/*.h`` files and recommend
appropriate source tree cleanup steps to get a working build again.

..

.. date: 2023-12-08-11-33-37
.. gh-issue: 112867
.. nonce: ZzDfXQ
.. section: Build

Fix the build for the case that WITH_PYMALLOC_RADIX_TREE=0 set.

..

.. bpo: 11102
.. date: 2020-05-01-23-44-31
.. nonce: Fw9zeS
.. section: Build

The :func:`os.major`, :func:`os.makedev`, and :func:`os.minor` functions are
now available on HP-UX v3.

..

.. bpo: 36351
.. date: 2020-01-11-23-49-17
.. nonce: ce8BBh
.. section: Build

Do not set ipv6type when cross-compiling.

..

.. date: 2024-02-05-16-53-12
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: YqjnDz
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.13.

..

.. date: 2024-02-01-14-35-05
.. gh-issue: 111239
.. nonce: SO7SUF
.. section: Windows

Update Windows builds to use zlib v1.3.1.

..

.. date: 2024-01-23-00-05-05
.. gh-issue: 100107
.. nonce: lkbP_Q
.. section: Windows

The ``py.exe`` launcher will no longer attempt to run the Microsoft Store
redirector when launching a script containing a ``/usr/bin/env`` shebang

..

.. date: 2024-01-15-23-53-25
.. gh-issue: 114096
.. nonce: G-Myja
.. section: Windows

Process privileges that are activated for creating directory junctions are
now restored afterwards, avoiding behaviour changes in other parts of the
program.

..

.. date: 2024-01-04-21-16-31
.. gh-issue: 111877
.. nonce: fR-B4c
.. section: Windows

:func:`os.stat` calls were returning incorrect time values for files that
could not be accessed directly.

..

.. date: 2023-12-14-19-00-29
.. gh-issue: 113009
.. nonce: 6LNdjz
.. section: Windows

:mod:`multiprocessing`: On Windows, fix a race condition in
``Process.terminate()``: no longer set the ``returncode`` attribute to
always call ``WaitForSingleObject()`` in ``Process.wait()``.  Previously,
sometimes the process was still running after ``TerminateProcess()`` even if
``GetExitCodeProcess()`` is not ``STILL_ACTIVE``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-03-15-23-53-45
.. gh-issue: 87868
.. nonce: 4C36oQ
.. section: Windows

Correctly sort and remove duplicate environment variables in
:py:func:`!_winapi.CreateProcess`.

..

.. bpo: 37308
.. date: 2019-06-16-11-27-05
.. nonce: Iz_NU_
.. section: Windows

Fix mojibake in :class:`mmap.mmap` when using a non-ASCII *tagname* argument
on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-02-06-09-01-10
.. gh-issue: 115009
.. nonce: ysau7e
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.45.1.

..

.. date: 2024-02-05-18-30-27
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: tun6Yu
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.13.

..

.. date: 2023-12-23-22-41-07
.. gh-issue: 110459
.. nonce: NaMBJy
.. section: macOS

Running ``configure ... --with-openssl-rpath=X/Y/Z`` no longer fails to
detect OpenSSL on macOS.

..

.. date: 2023-12-21-11-53-47
.. gh-issue: 74573
.. nonce: MA6Vys
.. section: macOS

Document that :mod:`dbm.ndbm` can silently corrupt DBM files on updates when
exceeding undocumented platform limits, and can crash (segmentation fault)
when reading such a corrupted file. (FB8919203)

..

.. date: 2023-12-21-10-20-41
.. gh-issue: 65701
.. nonce: Q2hNbN
.. section: macOS

The :program:`freeze` tool doesn't work with framework builds of Python.
Document this and bail out early when running the tool with such a build.

..

.. date: 2023-12-16-11-45-32
.. gh-issue: 108269
.. nonce: wVgCHF
.. section: macOS

Set ``CFBundleAllowMixedLocalizations`` to true in the Info.plist for the
framework, embedded Python.app and IDLE.app with framework installs on
macOS.  This allows applications to pick up the user's preferred locale when
that's different from english.

..

.. date: 2023-12-10-20-30-06
.. gh-issue: 102362
.. nonce: y8svbF
.. section: macOS

Make sure the result of :func:`sysconfig.get_plaform` includes at least a
major and minor versions, even if ``MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET`` is set to
only a major version during build to match the format expected by pip.

..

.. date: 2023-12-07-15-53-16
.. gh-issue: 110017
.. nonce: UMYzMR
.. section: macOS

Disable a signal handling stress test on macOS due to a bug in macOS
(FB13453490).

..

.. date: 2023-12-07-14-19-46
.. gh-issue: 110820
.. nonce: DIxb_F
.. section: macOS

Make sure the preprocessor definitions for ``ALIGNOF_MAX_ALIGN_T``,
``SIZEOF_LONG_DOUBLE`` and ``HAVE_GCC_ASM_FOR_X64`` are correct for
Universal 2 builds on macOS.

..

.. date: 2024-01-17-23-18-15
.. gh-issue: 96905
.. nonce: UYaxoU
.. section: IDLE

In idlelib code, stop redefining built-ins 'dict' and 'object'.

..

.. date: 2024-01-17-02-15-33
.. gh-issue: 72284
.. nonce: cAQiYO
.. section: IDLE

Improve the lists of features, editor key bindings, and shell key bingings
in the IDLE doc.

..

.. date: 2024-01-11-21-26-58
.. gh-issue: 113903
.. nonce: __GLlQ
.. section: IDLE

Fix rare failure of test.test_idle, in test_configdialog.

..

.. date: 2024-01-05-12-24-01
.. gh-issue: 113729
.. nonce: qpluea
.. section: IDLE

Fix the "Help -> IDLE Doc" menu bug in 3.11.7 and 3.12.1.

..

.. date: 2023-12-19-00-03-12
.. gh-issue: 113269
.. nonce: lrU-IC
.. section: IDLE

Fix test_editor hang on macOS Catalina.

..

.. date: 2023-12-10-20-01-11
.. gh-issue: 112898
.. nonce: 98aWv2
.. section: IDLE

Fix processing unsaved files when quitting IDLE on macOS.

..

.. date: 2023-04-25-03-01-23
.. gh-issue: 103820
.. nonce: LCSpza
.. section: IDLE

Revise IDLE bindings so that events from mouse button 4/5 on non-X11
windowing systems (i.e. Win32 and Aqua) are not mistaken for scrolling.

..

.. bpo: 13586
.. date: 2019-12-13-12-26-56
.. nonce: 1grqsR
.. section: IDLE

Enter the selected text when opening the "Replace" dialog.

..

.. date: 2024-02-05-19-00-32
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: yJSEkw
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 3.0.13 and multissltests to use
1.1.1w, 3.0.13, 3.1.5, and 3.2.1.

..

.. date: 2024-02-05-02-45-51
.. gh-issue: 115015
.. nonce: rgtiDB
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a bug in Argument Clinic that generated incorrect code for methods with
no parameters that use the :ref:`METH_METHOD | METH_FASTCALL | METH_KEYWORDS
<METH_METHOD-METH_FASTCALL-METH_KEYWORDS>` calling convention. Only the
positional parameter count was checked; any keyword argument passed would be
silently accepted.
