.. date: 2023-06-13-20-52-24
.. gh-issue: 102988
.. nonce: Kei7Vf
.. release date: 2023-07-11
.. section: Security

:cve:`2023-27043`: Prevent :func:`email.utils.parseaddr` and
:func:`email.utils.getaddresses` from returning the realname portion of an
invalid RFC2822 email header in the email address portion of the 2-tuple
returned after being parsed by :class:`email._parseaddr.AddressList`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-09-51-45
.. gh-issue: 106396
.. nonce: DmYp7x
.. section: Core and Builtins

When the format specification of an f-string expression is empty, the parser
now generates an empty :class:`ast.JoinedStr` node for it instead of an
one-element :class:`ast.JoinedStr` with an empty string
:class:`ast.Constant`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-09-46-41
.. gh-issue: 106145
.. nonce: QC6-Kq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``end_lineno`` and ``end_col_offset`` required on ``type_param`` ast
nodes.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-19-16-24
.. gh-issue: 105979
.. nonce: TDP2CU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in :func:`!_imp.get_frozen_object` due to improper exception
handling.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-14-19-17
.. gh-issue: 98931
.. nonce: PPgvSF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure custom :exc:`SyntaxError` error messages are raised for invalid
imports with multiple targets. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-19-11-04-01
.. gh-issue: 105908
.. nonce: 7oanny
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bug where :gh:`99111` breaks future import ``barry_as_FLUFL`` in the
Python REPL.

..

.. date: 2023-06-12-16-38-31
.. gh-issue: 105340
.. nonce: _jRHXe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Include the comprehension iteration variable in ``locals()`` inside a
module- or class-scope comprehension.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-10-15
.. gh-issue: 105486
.. nonce: dev-WS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the repr of ``ParamSpec`` list of args in ``types.GenericAlias``.

..

.. date: 2023-01-13-11-37-41
.. gh-issue: 101006
.. nonce: fuLvn2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling when read :mod:`marshal` data.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-17-44-03
.. gh-issue: 106524
.. nonce: XkBV8h
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :func:`!_sre.template` with templates containing invalid group
indices.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-13-47-28
.. gh-issue: 106510
.. nonce: 9n5BdC
.. section: Library

Improve debug output for atomic groups in regular expressions.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-03-05-58
.. gh-issue: 106503
.. nonce: ltfeiH
.. section: Library

Fix ref cycle in :class:`!asyncio._SelectorSocketTransport` by removing
``_write_ready`` in ``close``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-14-34-10
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: HU5u89
.. section: Library

Fix flag mask inversion when unnamed flags exist.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-13-08-23
.. gh-issue: 90876
.. nonce: Qvlkfl
.. section: Library

Prevent :mod:`multiprocessing.spawn` from failing to *import* in
environments where ``sys.executable`` is ``None``.  This regressed in 3.11
with the addition of support for path-like objects in multiprocessing.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-15-09-44
.. gh-issue: 106292
.. nonce: 3npldV
.. section: Library

Check for an instance-dict cached value in the :meth:`__get__` method of
:func:`functools.cached_property`. This better matches the pre-3.12 behavior
and improves compatibility for users subclassing
:func:`functools.cached_property` and adding a :meth:`__set__` method.

..

.. date: 2023-07-02-10-56-41
.. gh-issue: 106330
.. nonce: QSkIUH
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect matching of empty paths in :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.match`.
This bug was introduced in Python 3.12.0 beta 1.

..

.. date: 2023-07-01-16-40-54
.. gh-issue: 102541
.. nonce: C1ahtk
.. section: Library

Make pydoc.doc catch bad module ImportError when output stream is not None.

..

.. date: 2023-06-27-23-22-37
.. gh-issue: 106152
.. nonce: ya5jBT
.. section: Library

Added PY_THROW event hook for :mod:`cProfile` for generators

..

.. date: 2023-06-25-12-28-55
.. gh-issue: 106075
.. nonce: W7tMRb
.. section: Library

Added ``asyncio.taskgroups.__all__`` to ``asyncio.__all__`` for export in star
imports.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-15-21-11
.. gh-issue: 105987
.. nonce: T7Kzrb
.. section: Library

Fix crash due to improper reference counting in :mod:`asyncio` eager task
factory internal routines.

..

.. date: 2023-06-21-19-04-27
.. gh-issue: 105974
.. nonce: M47n3t
.. section: Library

Fix bug where a :class:`typing.Protocol` class that had one or more
non-callable members would raise :exc:`TypeError` when :func:`issubclass`
was called against it, even if it defined a custom ``__subclasshook__``
method. The behaviour in Python 3.11 and lower -- which has now been
restored -- was not to raise :exc:`TypeError` in these situations if a
custom ``__subclasshook__`` method was defined. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-06-20-23-18-45
.. gh-issue: 96145
.. nonce: o5dTRM
.. section: Library

Reverted addition of ``json.AttrDict``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-17-49-46
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: K6Q8nU
.. section: Library

Fix flag inversion when alias/mask members exist.

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-14-43-56
.. gh-issue: 104554
.. nonce: pwfKIo
.. section: Library

Add RTSPS scheme support in urllib.parse

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-18-45-13
.. gh-issue: 94777
.. nonce: mOybx7
.. section: Library

Fix hanging :mod:`multiprocessing` ``ProcessPoolExecutor`` when a child
process crashes while data is being written in the call queue.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-19-28-59
.. gh-issue: 106232
.. nonce: hQ4-tz
.. section: Documentation

Make timeit doc command lines compatible with Windows by using double quotes
for arguments.  This works on linux and macOS also.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-02-51-08
.. gh-issue: 101634
.. nonce: Rayczr
.. section: Tests

When running the Python test suite with ``-jN`` option, if a worker stdout
cannot be decoded from the locale encoding report a failed testn so the
exitcode is non-zero. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-26-21-56-29
.. gh-issue: 106118
.. nonce: 0cCfhl
.. section: Build

Fix compilation for platforms without :data:`!O_CLOEXEC`. The issue was
introduced with Python 3.12b1 in :gh:`103295`. Patch by Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-05-20-23-49-30
.. gh-issue: 104692
.. nonce: s5UIu5
.. section: Build

Include ``commoninstall`` as a prerequisite for ``bininstall``

This ensures that ``commoninstall`` is completed before ``bininstall`` is
started when parallel builds are used (``make -j install``), and so the
``python3`` symlink is only installed after all standard library modules are
installed.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-14-06-19
.. gh-issue: 106359
.. nonce: RfJuR0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now explicitly forbids "kwarg splats" in function calls used
as annotations.

..

.. date: 2023-06-13-14-24-55
.. gh-issue: 105227
.. nonce: HDL9aF
.. section: C API

The new :c:func:`PyType_GetDict` provides the dictionary for the given type
object that is normally exposed by ``cls.__dict__``.  Normally it's
sufficient to use :c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_dict`, but for the static
builtin types :c:member:`!tp_dict` is now always ``NULL``.
:c:func:`!PyType_GetDict()` provides the correct dict object instead.
