.. date: 2025-04-06-23-39-47
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: 2JI7iE
.. release date: 2025-04-08
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 8.6.16.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-24-00
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: 4UcBKy
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.16. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-48
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: VmKQkv
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-02-10-22-08-37
.. gh-issue: 91132
.. nonce: 00x1MI
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use ncurses 6.5.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-13-22-55
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: vI-LqV
.. section: Windows

Update bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.16. The new build also disables
uplink support, which may be relevant to embedders but has no impact on
normal use.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-31
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: hlS5EC
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-19-57-35
.. gh-issue: 131020
.. nonce: _c87wf
.. section: Windows

:source:`pylauncher <PC/launcher2.c>` correctly detects a BOM when searching
for the shebang. Fix by Chris Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-03-29-16-20-00
.. gh-issue: 131852
.. nonce: afuefb
.. section: Tools/Demos

:program:`msgfmt` no longer adds the ``POT-Creation-Date`` to generated
``.mo`` files for consistency with GNU ``msgfmt``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-24-21-36-23
.. gh-issue: 85012
.. nonce: 9K1U0E
.. section: Tools/Demos

Correctly reset ``msgctxt`` when compiling messages in :program:`msgfmt`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-12-14-58-54
.. gh-issue: 130025
.. nonce: _-mp5K
.. section: Tools/Demos

The iOS testbed now correctly handles symlinks used as Python framework
references.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-18-58-03
.. gh-issue: 131050
.. nonce: FMBAPN
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl.test_dh_params`` is skipped if the underlying TLS library does
not support finite-field ephemeral Diffie-Hellman.

..

.. date: 2025-02-26-15-10-16
.. gh-issue: 129200
.. nonce: XH4TeC
.. section: Tests

Multiple iOS testbed runners can now be started at the same time without
introducing an ambiguity over simulator ownership.

..

.. date: 2025-02-20-13-50-07
.. gh-issue: 130292
.. nonce: RvK2Ou
.. section: Tests

The iOS testbed will now run successfully on a machine that has not
previously run Xcode tests (such as CI configurations).

..

.. date: 2025-02-20-13-39-12
.. gh-issue: 130293
.. nonce: 5igSsu
.. section: Tests

The tests of terminal colorization are no longer sensitive to the value of
the ``TERM`` variable in the testing environment.

..

.. date: 2025-01-26-20-17-58
.. gh-issue: 126332
.. nonce: c0wUS-
.. section: Tests

Add unit tests for pyrepl.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-04-11-08
.. gh-issue: 131809
.. nonce: 4MBDuy
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.1

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-23-28-39
.. gh-issue: 131261
.. nonce: 0aB6nM
.. section: Security

Upgrade to libexpat 2.7.0

..

.. date: 2024-11-28-20-29-21
.. gh-issue: 127371
.. nonce: PeEhUd
.. section: Security

Avoid unbounded buffering for
:meth:`!tempfile.SpooledTemporaryFile.writelines`. Previously, disk
spillover was only checked after the lines iterator had been exhausted. This
is now done after each line is written.

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-12-27-34
.. gh-issue: 121284
.. nonce: 8rwPxe
.. section: Security

Fix bug in the folding of rfc2047 encoded-words when flattening an email
message using a modern email policy. Previously when an encoded-word was too
long for a line, it would be decoded, split across lines, and re-encoded.
But commas and other special characters in the original text could be left
unencoded and unquoted. This could theoretically be used to spoof header
lines using a carefully constructed encoded-word if the resulting rendered
email was transmitted or re-parsed.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-16-08
.. gh-issue: 132174
.. nonce: dN4b-X
.. section: Library

Fix function name in error message of ``_interpreters.run_string``.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-09-21
.. gh-issue: 132171
.. nonce: zZqvfn
.. section: Library

Fix crash of ``_interpreters.run_string`` on string subclasses.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-19-25-12
.. gh-issue: 129204
.. nonce: sAVFO6
.. section: Library

Introduce new ``_PYTHON_SUBPROCESS_USE_POSIX_SPAWN`` environment variable
knob in :mod:`subprocess` to control the use of :func:`os.posix_spawn`.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-16-12-49
.. gh-issue: 132159
.. nonce: WvBfBm
.. section: Library

Do not shadow user arguments in generated :meth:`!__new__` by decorator
:class:`warnings.deprecated`. Patch by Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2025-04-04-16-22-03
.. gh-issue: 132075
.. nonce: qMM5np
.. section: Library

Fix possible use of :mod:`socket` address structures with uninitialized
members. Now all structure members are initialized with zeroes by default.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-11-31-15
.. gh-issue: 132002
.. nonce: TMsYvE
.. section: Library

Fix crash when deallocating :class:`contextvars.ContextVar` with weird
unahashable string names.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-11-26-31
.. gh-issue: 131668
.. nonce: tcS4xS
.. section: Library

:mod:`socket`: Fix code parsing AF_BLUETOOTH socket addresses.

..

.. date: 2025-03-20-08-32-49
.. gh-issue: 131492
.. nonce: saC2cA
.. section: Library

Fix a resource leak when constructing a :class:`gzip.GzipFile` with a
filename fails, for example when passing an invalid ``compresslevel``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-18-50-39
.. gh-issue: 131325
.. nonce: wlasMF
.. section: Library

Fix sendfile fallback implementation to drain data after writing to
transport in :mod:`asyncio`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-15-45-36
.. gh-issue: 129843
.. nonce: NPdpXL
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect argument passing in :func:`warnings.warn_explicit`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-09-28-13
.. gh-issue: 131204
.. nonce: wogNEX
.. section: Library

Use monospace font from System Font Stack for cross-platform support in
:class:`difflib.HtmlDiff`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-12-11-53-32
.. gh-issue: 130940
.. nonce: 81K1Tg
.. section: Library

The ``PyConfig.use_system_logger`` attribute, introduced in Python 3.13.2,
has been removed. The introduction of this attribute inadvertently
introduced an ABI breakage on macOS and iOS. The use of the system logger is
now enabled by default on iOS, and disabled by default on macOS.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-12-26-56
.. gh-issue: 131045
.. nonce: s1TssJ
.. section: Library

Fix issue with ``__contains__``, values, and pseudo-members for
:class:`enum.Flag`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-07-19-24-27
.. gh-issue: 130959
.. nonce: xO8vVS
.. section: Library

Fix pure-Python implementation of :func:`datetime.time.fromisoformat` to
reject times with spaces in fractional part (for example, ``12:34:56.400
+02:00``), matching the C implementation. Patch by Michał Gorny.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-02-19-28
.. gh-issue: 130637
.. nonce: swet54w4rs
.. section: Library

Add validation for numeric response data in poplib.POP3.stat() method

..

.. date: 2025-02-25-03-53-00
.. gh-issue: 130461
.. nonce: asr2dg
.. section: Library

Remove ``.. index::`` directives from the :mod:`uuid` module documentation.
These directives previously created entries in the general index for
:func:`~uuid.getnode` as well as the :func:`~uuid.uuid1`,
:func:`~uuid.uuid3`, :func:`~uuid.uuid4`, and :func:`~uuid.uuid5`
constructor functions.

..

.. date: 2025-02-24-14-46-20
.. gh-issue: 130379
.. nonce: lsef7A
.. section: Library

The zipapp module now calculates the list of files to be added to the
archive before creating the archive. This avoids accidentally including the
target when it is being created in the source directory.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-10-32-05
.. gh-issue: 130285
.. nonce: C0fkh7
.. section: Library

Fix corner case for :func:`random.sample` allowing the *counts* parameter to
specify an empty population. So now, ``sample([], 0, counts=[])`` and
``sample('abc', k=0, counts=[0, 0, 0])`` both give the same result as
``sample([], 0)``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-19-19-29-19
.. gh-issue: 130250
.. nonce: T00tql
.. section: Library

Fix regression in ``traceback.print_last()``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-17-21-16-51
.. gh-issue: 130230
.. nonce: 9ta9P9
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :func:`pow` with only :class:`~decimal.Decimal` third argument.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-10-12-27
.. gh-issue: 118761
.. nonce: TNw5ZC
.. section: Library

Reverts a change in the previous release attempting to make some stdlib
imports used within the :mod:`subprocess` module lazy as this was causing
errors during ``__del__`` finalizers calling methods such as ``terminate``,
or ``kill``, or ``send_signal``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-08-56-48
.. gh-issue: 130164
.. nonce: vvoaU2
.. section: Library

Fixed failure to raise :exc:`TypeError` in :meth:`inspect.Signature.bind`
for positional-only arguments provided by keyword when a variadic keyword
argument (e.g. ``**kwargs``) is present.

..

.. date: 2025-02-15-12-36-49
.. gh-issue: 130151
.. nonce: 3IFumF
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in :func:`!_hashlib.hmac_new` and
:func:`!_hashlib.hmac_digest`. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-02-15-07-50-37
.. gh-issue: 130145
.. nonce: I0CkV0
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!asyncio.AbstractEventloop.run_forever` when another loop is
already running.

..

.. date: 2025-02-12-12-38-24
.. gh-issue: 129726
.. nonce: jB0sxu
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`gzip.GzipFile` raising an unraisable exception during garbage
collection when referring to a temporary object by breaking the reference
loop with :mod:`weakref`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-12-09-48-25
.. gh-issue: 127750
.. nonce: ibhIZg
.. section: Library

Remove broken :func:`functools.singledispatchmethod` caching introduced in
:gh:`85160`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-09-17-47-01
.. gh-issue: 129583
.. nonce: -130Ys
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 25.0.1

..

.. date: 2025-02-08-15-13-43
.. gh-issue: 97850
.. nonce: jQ0CvW
.. section: Library

Update the deprecation warning of :meth:`importlib.abc.Loader.load_module`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-04-15-16-33
.. gh-issue: 129646
.. nonce: sapk1F
.. section: Library

Update the locale alias mapping in the :mod:`locale` module to match the
latest X Org locale alias mapping and support new locales in Glibc 2.41.

..

.. date: 2025-02-03-01-43-16
.. gh-issue: 129603
.. nonce: xge9Tx
.. section: Library

Fix bugs where :class:`sqlite3.Row` objects could segfault if their
inherited :attr:`~sqlite3.Cursor.description` was set to ``None``. Patch by
Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2025-01-30-22-49-42
.. gh-issue: 128231
.. nonce: SuEC18
.. section: Library

Execution of multiple statements in the new REPL now stops immediately upon
the first exception encountered. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2025-01-24-12-30-38
.. gh-issue: 117779
.. nonce: gADGXI
.. section: Library

Fix reading duplicated entries in :mod:`zipfile` by name. Reading duplicated
entries (except the last one) by ``ZipInfo`` now emits a warning instead of
raising an exception.

..

.. date: 2025-01-22-13-29-06
.. gh-issue: 128772
.. nonce: 6YrxYM
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`pydoc` for methods with the ``__module__`` attribute equal to
``None``.

..

.. date: 2025-01-20-20-59-26
.. gh-issue: 92897
.. nonce: G0xH8o
.. section: Library

Scheduled the deprecation of the ``check_home`` argument of
:func:`sysconfig.is_python_build` to Python 3.15.

..

.. date: 2025-01-15-15-45-21
.. gh-issue: 128657
.. nonce: P5LNQA
.. section: Library

Fix possible extra reference when using objects returned by
:func:`hashlib.sha256` under :term:`free threading`.

..

.. date: 2025-01-15-12-04-30
.. gh-issue: 128703
.. nonce: 6WPf38
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`mimetypes.guess_type` to use default mapping for empty
``Content-Type`` in registry.

..

.. date: 2025-01-13-07-54-32
.. gh-issue: 128308
.. nonce: kYSDRF
.. section: Library

Support the *name* keyword argument for eager tasks in
:func:`asyncio.loop.create_task`,  :func:`asyncio.create_task` and
:func:`asyncio.TaskGroup.create_task`, by passing on all *kwargs* to the
task factory set by :func:`asyncio.loop.set_task_factory`.

..

.. date: 2025-01-01-19-24-43
.. gh-issue: 128388
.. nonce: 8UdMz_
.. section: Library

Fix ``PyREPL`` on Windows to support more keybindings, like the
:kbd:`Control-←` and :kbd:`Control-→` word-skipping keybindings and those
with meta (i.e. :kbd:`Alt`), e.g. :kbd:`Alt-d` to ``kill-word`` or
:kbd:`Alt-Backspace` ``backward-kill-word``.

..

.. date: 2024-12-15-15-07-22
.. gh-issue: 126037
.. nonce: OyA7JP
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.find
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.find>`, :meth:`Element.findtext
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findtext>` and :meth:`Element.findall
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findall>` when the tag to find implements an
:meth:`~object.__eq__` method mutating the element being queried. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-12-07-20-33-43
.. gh-issue: 127712
.. nonce: Uzsij4
.. section: Library

Fix handling of the ``secure`` argument of
:class:`logging.handlers.SMTPHandler`.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-12-59-45
.. gh-issue: 126033
.. nonce: sM3uCn
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.remove
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.remove>` when the element is concurrently
mutated. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-10-28-19-49-18
.. gh-issue: 118201
.. nonce: v41XXh
.. section: Library

Fixed intermittent failures of :any:`os.confstr`, :any:`os.pathconf` and
:any:`os.sysconf` on iOS and Android.

..

.. date: 2024-10-05-13-25-07
.. gh-issue: 124927
.. nonce: uzNA32
.. section: Library

Non-printing characters are now properly handled in the new REPL.

..

.. date: 2025-02-08-23-42-24
.. gh-issue: 129873
.. nonce: -gofkd
.. section: IDLE

Simplify displaying the IDLE doc by only copying the text section of
idle.html to idlelib/help.html. Patch by Stan Ulbrych.

..

.. date: 2025-03-18-15-15-16
.. gh-issue: 131417
.. nonce: lQg5aH
.. section: Documentation

Mention :class:`asyncio.Future` and :class:`asyncio.Task` in generic classes
list.

..

.. date: 2025-02-22-02-24-39
.. gh-issue: 125722
.. nonce: zDIUFV
.. section: Documentation

Require Sphinx 8.2.0 or later to build the Python documentation. Patch by
Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-08-44-31
.. gh-issue: 129712
.. nonce: 4AcfWQ
.. section: Documentation

The wheel tags supported by each macOS universal SDK option are now
documented.

..

.. date: 2025-02-16-14-57-00
.. gh-issue: 46236
.. nonce: 2HuS4S
.. section: Documentation

C API: Document :c:func:`PyUnicode_RSplit`, :c:func:`PyUnicode_Partition`
and :c:func:`PyUnicode_RPartition`.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-17-47-14
.. gh-issue: 132011
.. nonce: dNh64H
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when calling :meth:`!list.append` as an unbound method.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-22-24-19
.. gh-issue: 131998
.. nonce: DvmZcT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when using an unbound method :term:`descriptor` object in a
function where a bound method descriptor was used.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-19-25-05
.. gh-issue: 131988
.. nonce: sbYLEs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a performance regression that caused scaling bottlenecks in the free
threaded build in 3.13.1 and 3.13.2.

..

.. date: 2025-03-25-13-58-25
.. gh-issue: 131719
.. nonce: zKv98a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing NULL check in ``_PyMem_FreeDelayed`` in :term:`free-threaded
<free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-03-24-19-38-53
.. gh-issue: 131670
.. nonce: IffOZj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`anext` failing on sync :meth:`~object.__anext__` raising an
exception.

..

.. date: 2025-03-12-11-19-46
.. gh-issue: 131141
.. nonce: tQz594
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix data race in :data:`sys.monitoring` instrumentation while registering
callback.

..

.. date: 2025-03-06-22-56-02
.. gh-issue: 130932
.. nonce: QVHaKT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect exception handling in ``_PyModule_IsPossiblyShadowing``

..

.. date: 2025-03-04-20-33-28
.. gh-issue: 130851
.. nonce: MT9j7n
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the :term:`free threading` build when constructing a
:class:`code` object with :attr:`~codeobject.co_consts` that contains
instances of types that are not otherwise generated by the bytecode
compiler.

..

.. date: 2025-03-03-20-33-44
.. gh-issue: 130794
.. nonce: LwtGQc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in the :term:`free threaded <free threading>` build when
resizing a shared list or dictionary from multiple short-lived threads.

..

.. date: 2025-03-03-20-02-45
.. gh-issue: 130775
.. nonce: fEM6T-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not crash on negative ``column`` and ``end_column`` in :mod:`ast`
locations.

..

.. date: 2025-02-28-16-13-02
.. gh-issue: 130382
.. nonce: 66VTmy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``PyRefTracer_DESTROY`` not being sent from :file:`Python/ceval.c`
``Py_DECREF()``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-27-15-07-06
.. gh-issue: 130618
.. nonce: JTcsRB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that was causing ``UnicodeDecodeError`` or ``SystemError`` to be
raised when using f-strings with ``lambda`` expressions with non-ASCII
characters. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2025-02-24-14-25-36
.. gh-issue: 130163
.. nonce: rGpc9v
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes related to concurrent change and use of the :mod:`sys`
module attributes.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-14-47-46
.. gh-issue: 88887
.. nonce: V3U0CV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixing multiprocessing Resource Tracker process leaking, usually observed
when running Python as PID 1.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-00-12-24
.. gh-issue: 130115
.. nonce: mF-rP6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue with thread identifiers being sign-extended on some platforms.

..

.. date: 2025-02-17-18-59-33
.. gh-issue: 128396
.. nonce: iVtoYY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash that occurs when calling :func:`locals` inside an inline
comprehension that uses the same local variable as the outer frame scope
where the variable is a free or cell var.

..

.. date: 2025-02-13-00-28-43
.. gh-issue: 116042
.. nonce: 861juq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix location for SyntaxErrors of invalid escapes in the tokenizer. Patch by
Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2025-02-11-20-38-37
.. gh-issue: 129983
.. nonce: _1Fujo
.. section: Library

Fix data race in compile_template in :file:`sre.c`.

..

.. date: 2025-02-10-20-01-56
.. gh-issue: 129967
.. nonce: J60tEl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition in the :term:`free threading` build when ``repr(set)``
is called concurrently with ``set.clear()``.

..

.. date: 2025-02-09-09-54-37
.. gh-issue: 129900
.. nonce: GAGGPn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix return codes inside :exc:`SystemExit` not getting returned by the REPL.

..

.. date: 2025-02-06-17-57-33
.. gh-issue: 129732
.. nonce: yl97oq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a race in ``_Py_qsbr_reserve`` in the free threading build.

..

.. date: 2025-02-05-11-29-52
.. gh-issue: 129643
.. nonce: 4mGzvg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix thread safety of :c:func:`PyList_Insert` in free-threading builds.

..

.. date: 2025-02-04-21-26-05
.. gh-issue: 129668
.. nonce: zDanyM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix race condition when raising :exc:`MemoryError` in the free threaded
build.

..

.. date: 2025-02-04-12-42-40
.. gh-issue: 129643
.. nonce: K24Zow
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix thread safety of :c:func:`PyList_SetItem` in free-threading builds.
Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2025-01-19-09-07-44
.. gh-issue: 128714
.. nonce: m1fyCB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the potential races in get/set dunder methods ``__annotations__``,
``__annotate__`` and ``__type_params__`` for function object, and add
related tests.

..

.. date: 2025-01-11-20-11-28
.. gh-issue: 128632
.. nonce: ryhnKs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow ``__classdict__`` as the name of a type parameter. Using this name
would previously crash the interpreter in some circumstances.

..

.. date: 2024-12-30-15-49-31
.. gh-issue: 127953
.. nonce: B4_6L9
.. section: Core and Builtins

The time to handle a ``LINE`` event in sys.monitoring (and sys.settrace) is
now independent of the number of lines in the code object.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-23-30-35
.. gh-issue: 125331
.. nonce: quKQ7V
.. section: Core and Builtins

``from __future__ import barry_as_FLUFL`` now works in more contexts,
including when it is used in files, with the ``-c`` flag, and in the REPL
when there are multiple statements on the same line. Previously, it worked
only on subsequent lines in the REPL, and when the appropriate flags were
passed directly to :func:`compile`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2025-03-26-06-56-40
.. gh-issue: 131740
.. nonce: 9PdxxQ
.. section: C API

Update PyUnstable_GC_VisitObjects to traverse perm gen.

..

.. date: 2025-02-02-12-58-21
.. gh-issue: 129533
.. nonce: dFfqkT
.. section: C API

Update :c:func:`PyGC_Enable()`, :c:func:`PyGC_Disable()`,
:c:func:`PyGC_IsEnabled()` to use atomic operation for thread-safety at
free-threading build. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-19-22-41
.. gh-issue: 131865
.. nonce: PIJy7X
.. section: Build

The DTrace build now properly passes the ``CC`` and ``CFLAGS`` variables to
the ``dtrace`` command when utilizing SystemTap on Linux.

..

.. date: 2025-03-27-01-21-50
.. gh-issue: 131675
.. nonce: l2zfOO
.. section: Build

Fix mimalloc library builds for 32-bit ARM targets.

..

.. date: 2025-03-06-20-55-34
.. gh-issue: 130673
.. nonce: T3RSCI
.. section: Build

Fix potential ``KeyError`` when handling object sections during JIT building
process.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-18-27-42
.. gh-issue: 130740
.. nonce: nDFSHR
.. section: Build

Ensure that ``Python.h`` is included before ``stdbool.h`` unless
``pyconfig.h`` is included before or in some platform-specific contexts.

..

.. date: 2025-02-07-21-20-21
.. gh-issue: 129838
.. nonce: fkuiEc
.. section: Build

Don't redefine ``_Py_NO_SANITIZE_UNDEFINED`` when compiling with a recent
GCC version and undefined sanitizer enabled.

..

.. date: 2025-02-04-12-30-43
.. gh-issue: 129660
.. nonce: SitXa7
.. section: Build

Drop ``test_embed`` from PGO training, whose contribution in recent versions
is considered to be ignorable.
