.. date: 2025-06-05-13-52-36
.. gh-issue: 135151
.. nonce: 4PfNZQ
.. release date: 2025-06-11
.. section: Windows

Avoid distributing modified :file:`pyconfig.h` in the traditional installer.
Extension module builds must always specify ``Py_GIL_DISABLED`` when
targeting the free-threaded runtime.

..

.. date: 2025-06-04-13-07-44
.. gh-issue: 135120
.. nonce: NapnZT
.. section: Tests

Add :func:`!test.support.subTests`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-10-16-11-00
.. gh-issue: 133967
.. nonce: P0c24q
.. section: Library

Do not normalize :mod:`locale` name 'C.UTF-8' to 'en_US.UTF-8'.

..

.. date: 2025-06-10-10-00-17
.. gh-issue: 135326
.. nonce: sOHe_p
.. section: Library

Restore support of integer-like objects with :meth:`!__index__` in
:func:`random.getrandbits`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-10-00-42-30
.. gh-issue: 135321
.. nonce: UHh9jT
.. section: Library

Raise a correct exception for values greater than 0x7fffffff for the
``BINSTRING`` opcode in the C implementation of :mod:`pickle`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-08-14-50-34
.. gh-issue: 135276
.. nonce: ZLUhV1
.. section: Library

Backported bugfixes in zipfile.Path from zipp 3.23. Fixed ``.name``,
``.stem`` and other basename-based properties on Windows when working with a
zipfile on disk.

..

.. date: 2025-05-25-23-23-05
.. gh-issue: 134151
.. nonce: 13Wwsb
.. section: Library

:mod:`email`: Fix :exc:`TypeError` in :func:`email.utils.decode_params` when
sorting :rfc:`2231` continuations that contain an unnumbered section.

..

.. date: 2025-05-18-23-46-21
.. gh-issue: 134152
.. nonce: 30HwbX
.. section: Library

:mod:`email`: Fix parsing of email message ID with invalid domain.

..

.. date: 2025-04-21-01-03-15
.. gh-issue: 127081
.. nonce: WXRliX
.. section: Library

Fix libc thread safety issues with :mod:`os` by replacing ``getlogin`` with
``getlogin_r`` re-entrant version.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-06-41-54
.. gh-issue: 131884
.. nonce: ym9BJN
.. section: Library

Fix formatting issues in :func:`json.dump` when both *indent* and *skipkeys*
are used.

..

.. date: 2025-06-11-14-09-12
.. gh-issue: 135171
.. nonce: VUdivl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Roll back changes to generator and list comprehensions that went into 3.13.4
to fix GH-127682, but which involved semantic and bytecode changes not
appropriate for a bugfix release.

..

.. date: 2025-06-05-11-06-07
.. gh-issue: 134989
.. nonce: 74p4ud
.. section: C API

Fix ``Py_RETURN_NONE``, ``Py_RETURN_TRUE`` and ``Py_RETURN_FALSE`` macros in
the limited C API 3.11 and older: don't treat ``Py_None``, ``Py_True`` and
``Py_False`` as immortal. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-06-02-13-19-22
.. gh-issue: 134989
.. nonce: sDDyBN
.. section: C API

Implement :c:func:`PyObject_DelAttr` and :c:func:`PyObject_DelAttrString` as
macros in the limited C API 3.12 and older. Patch by Victor Stinner.
