.. date: 2023-08-22-17-39-12
.. gh-issue: 108310
.. nonce: fVM3sg
.. release date: 2023-10-13
.. section: Security

Fixed an issue where instances of :class:`ssl.SSLSocket` were vulnerable to
a bypass of the TLS handshake and included protections (like certificate
verification) and treating sent unencrypted data as if it were
post-handshake TLS encrypted data.  Security issue reported as
:cve:`2023-40217` by Aapo Oksman. Patch by Gregory P. Smith.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-03-51-05
.. gh-issue: 107774
.. nonce: VPjaTR
.. section: Security

PEP 669 specifies that ``sys.monitoring.register_callback`` will generate an
audit event. Pre-releases of Python 3.12 did not generate the audit event.
This is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-06-13-20-52-24
.. gh-issue: 102988
.. nonce: Kei7Vf
.. section: Security

Reverted the :mod:`email.utils` security improvement change released in
3.12beta4 that unintentionally caused :mod:`email.utils.getaddresses` to
fail to parse email addresses with a comma in the quoted name field. See
:gh:`106669`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-09-29-08
.. gh-issue: 99108
.. nonce: hwS2cr
.. section: Security

Refresh our new HACL* built-in :mod:`hashlib` code from upstream. Built-in
SHA2 should be faster and an issue with SHA3 on 32-bit platforms is fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-03-07-21-46-29
.. gh-issue: 102509
.. nonce: 5ouaH_
.. section: Security

Start initializing ``ob_digit`` during creation of :c:type:`PyLongObject`
objects. Patch by Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-10-12-15-03-24
.. gh-issue: 110782
.. nonce: EqzIzi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when :class:`typing.TypeVar` is constructed with a keyword
argument. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-10-12-06-32-25
.. gh-issue: 110752
.. nonce: FYfI0h
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reset ``ceval.eval_breaker`` in :func:`interpreter_clear`

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-16-56-54
.. gh-issue: 110721
.. nonce: afcSsH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use the :mod:`traceback` implementation for the default
:c:func:`PyErr_Display` functionality. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-13-46-14
.. gh-issue: 110696
.. nonce: J9kSzr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect error message for invalid argument unpacking. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-12-48-03
.. gh-issue: 104169
.. nonce: bPoX8u
.. section: Core and Builtins

Split the tokenizer into two separate directories: - One part includes the
actual lexeme producing logic and lives in ``Parser/lexer``. - The second
part wraps the lexer according to the different tokenization modes   we have
(string, utf-8, file, interactive, readline) and lives in
``Parser/tokenizer``.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-11-39-22
.. gh-issue: 110688
.. nonce: lB6Q7t
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove undocumented ``test_c_api`` method from :class:`set`, which was only
defined for testing purposes under ``Py_DEBUG``. Now we have proper CAPI
tests.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-00-49-35
.. gh-issue: 104584
.. nonce: z94TuJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference leak when running with :envvar:`PYTHONUOPS` or :option:`-X
uops <-X>` enabled.

..

.. date: 2023-10-08-20-08-54
.. gh-issue: 110514
.. nonce: Q9bdRU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add ``PY_THROW`` to :func:`sys.setprofile` events

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-22-30-25
.. gh-issue: 110489
.. nonce: rI2n8A
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimise :func:`math.ceil` when the input is exactly a float, resulting in
about a 10% improvement.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-12-00-43
.. gh-issue: 110455
.. nonce: 8BjNGg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Guard ``assert(tstate->thread_id > 0)`` with ``#ifndef HAVE_PTHREAD_STUBS``.
This allows for pydebug builds to work under WASI which (currently)
lacks thread support.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-23-26-18
.. gh-issue: 110309
.. nonce: Y8nDOF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove unnecessary empty constant nodes in the ast of f-string specs.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-11-43-48
.. gh-issue: 110259
.. nonce: ka93x5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly identify the format spec in f-strings (with single or triple
quotes) that have multiple lines in the expression part and include a
formatting spec. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-23-17-08
.. gh-issue: 110237
.. nonce: _Xub0z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing error checks for calls to ``PyList_Append`` in
``_PyEval_MatchClass``.

..

.. date: 2023-10-01-02-58-00
.. gh-issue: 110164
.. nonce: z7TMCq
.. section: Core and Builtins

regrtest: If the ``SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH`` environment variable is defined,
regrtest now disables tests randomization. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-21-35-49
.. gh-issue: 109889
.. nonce: t5hIRT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the compiler's redundant NOP detection algorithm to skip over NOPs with
no line number when looking for the next instruction's lineno.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-18-01-06
.. gh-issue: 109853
.. nonce: coQQiL
.. section: Core and Builtins

``sys.path[0]`` is now set correctly for subinterpreters.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-21-26-54
.. gh-issue: 109923
.. nonce: WO3CHi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Set line number on the ``POP_TOP`` that follows a ``RETURN_GENERATOR``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-14-00-25
.. gh-issue: 105716
.. nonce: SUJkW1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Subinterpreters now correctly handle the case where they have threads
running in the background.  Before, such threads would interfere with
cleaning up and destroying them, as well as prevent running another script.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-03-46-55
.. gh-issue: 109369
.. nonce: OJbxbF
.. section: Core and Builtins

The internal eval_breaker and supporting flags, plus the monitoring version
have been merged into a single atomic integer to speed up checks.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-14-28-14
.. gh-issue: 109823
.. nonce: kbVTKF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where compiler does not adjust labels when removing an empty basic
block which is a jump target.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-09-24-10
.. gh-issue: 109793
.. nonce: zFQBkv
.. section: Core and Builtins

The main thread no longer exits prematurely when a subinterpreter is cleaned
up during runtime finalization.  The bug was a problem particularly because,
when triggered, the Python process would always return with a 0 exitcode,
even if it failed.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-13-38-17
.. gh-issue: 109719
.. nonce: fx5OTz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing jump target labels when compiler reorders cold/warm blocks.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-01-44-53
.. gh-issue: 109595
.. nonce: fVINgD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :option:`-X cpu_count <-X>`  command line option to override return
results of :func:`os.cpu_count` and :func:`os.process_cpu_count`. This
option is useful for users who need to limit CPU resources of a container
system without having to modify the container (application code). Patch by
Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-23-04-15
.. gh-issue: 109627
.. nonce: xxe7De
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where the compiler does not assign a new jump target label to a
duplicated small exit block.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-13-18-08
.. gh-issue: 109596
.. nonce: RG0K2G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some tokens in the grammar that were incorrectly marked as soft
keywords. Also fix some repeated rule names and ensure that repeated rules
are not allowed. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-18-15-35-08
.. gh-issue: 109496
.. nonce: Kleoz3
.. section: Core and Builtins

On a Python built in debug mode, :c:func:`Py_DECREF()` now calls
``_Py_NegativeRefcount()`` if the object is a dangling pointer to
deallocated memory: memory filled with ``0xDD`` "dead byte" by the debug
hook on memory allocators. The fix is to check the reference count *before*
checking for ``_Py_IsImmortal()``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-14-20-15-57
.. gh-issue: 107265
.. nonce: qHZL_6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deopt opcodes hidden by the executor when base opcode is needed

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-21-04-04
.. gh-issue: 109371
.. nonce: HPEJr8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deopted instructions correctly for tool initialization and modified the
incorrect assertion in instrumentation, when a previous tool already sets
INSTRUCTION events

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-19-16-51
.. gh-issue: 105658
.. nonce: z2nR2u
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where the line trace of an except block ending with a conditional
includes an excess event with the line of the conditional expression.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-08-42-45
.. gh-issue: 109219
.. nonce: UiN8sc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix compiling type param scopes that use a name which is also free in an
inner scope.

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-16-00-42
.. gh-issue: 109351
.. nonce: kznGeR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when compiling an invalid AST involving a named (walrus)
expression.

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-15-45-49
.. gh-issue: 109341
.. nonce: 4V5bkm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when compiling an invalid AST involving a :class:`ast.TypeAlias`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-15-51-55
.. gh-issue: 109195
.. nonce: iwxmuo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source location for the ``LOAD_*`` instruction preceding a
``LOAD_SUPER_ATTR`` to load the ``super`` global (or shadowing variable) so
that it encompasses only the name ``super`` and not the following
parentheses.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-15-11-03
.. gh-issue: 109256
.. nonce: 6mfhvF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Opcode IDs for specialized opcodes are allocated in their own range to
improve stability of the IDs for the 'real' opcodes.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-12-41-42
.. gh-issue: 109216
.. nonce: 60QOSb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible memory leak in :opcode:`BUILD_MAP`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-18-53-55
.. gh-issue: 109207
.. nonce: Fei8bY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a SystemError in ``__repr__`` of symtable entry object.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-21-17-18
.. gh-issue: 109179
.. nonce: ZR8qs2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where the C traceback display drops notes from :exc:`SyntaxError`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-12-49-46
.. gh-issue: 109118
.. nonce: gx0X4h
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow nested scopes (lambdas, generator expressions, and comprehensions)
within PEP 695 annotation scopes that are nested within classes.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-18-31-04
.. gh-issue: 109156
.. nonce: KK1EXI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add tests for de-instrumenting instructions while keeping the
instrumentation for lines

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-01-50-41
.. gh-issue: 109114
.. nonce: adqgtb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Relax the detection of the error message for invalid lambdas inside
f-strings to not search for arbitrary replacement fields to avoid false
positives. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-20-52-27
.. gh-issue: 105848
.. nonce: p799D1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new :opcode:`CALL_KW` opcode, used for calls containing keyword
arguments. Also, fix a possible crash when jumping over method calls in a
debugger.

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-18-49-01
.. gh-issue: 109052
.. nonce: TBU4nC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use the base opcode when comparing code objects to avoid interference from
instrumentation

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-18-24-42
.. gh-issue: 109118
.. nonce: yPXRAe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix interpreter crash when a NameError is raised inside the type parameters
of a generic class.

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-16-05-36
.. gh-issue: 88943
.. nonce: rH_X3W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve syntax error for non-ASCII character that follows a numerical
literal. It now points on the invalid non-ASCII character, not on the valid
numerical literal.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-22-50-25
.. gh-issue: 108976
.. nonce: MUKaIJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash that occurs after de-instrumenting a code object in a monitoring
callback.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-13-28-42
.. gh-issue: 108732
.. nonce: I6DkEQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make iteration variables of module- and class-scoped comprehensions visible
to pdb and other tools that use ``frame.f_locals`` again.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-20-52-17
.. gh-issue: 108959
.. nonce: 6z45Sy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix caret placement for error locations for subscript and binary operations
that involve non-semantic parentheses and spaces. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-11-31-27
.. gh-issue: 104584
.. nonce: IRSXA2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when running with :envvar:`PYTHONUOPS` or :option:`-X uops <-X>`
enabled and an error occurs during optimization.

..

.. date: 2023-08-31-21-29-28
.. gh-issue: 108727
.. nonce: blNRGM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Define ``tp_dealloc`` for ``CounterOptimizer_Type``. This fixes a segfault
on deallocation.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-15-41-47
.. gh-issue: 108520
.. nonce: u0ZGP_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :meth:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock.__setstate__` to properly
initialize :attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock._is_fork_ctx`. This
fixes a regression when passing a SemLock across nested processes.

Rename :attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock.is_fork_ctx` to
:attr:`multiprocessing.synchronize.SemLock._is_fork_ctx` to avoid exposing
it as public API.

..

.. date: 2023-08-29-17-53-12
.. gh-issue: 108654
.. nonce: jbkDVo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore locals shadowed by an inlined comprehension if the comprehension
raises an exception.

..

.. date: 2023-08-28-22-22-15
.. gh-issue: 108488
.. nonce: e8-fxg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the initialization of inline cache entries so that the cache entry
for ``JUMP_BACKWARD`` is initialized to zero, instead of the
``adaptive_counter_warmup()`` value used for all other instructions. This
counter, unique among instructions, counts up from zero.

..

.. date: 2023-08-28-03-38-28
.. gh-issue: 108716
.. nonce: HJBPwt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Turn off deep-freezing of code objects. Modules are still frozen, so that a
file system search is not needed for common modules.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-10-36-45
.. gh-issue: 108614
.. nonce: wl5l-W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add RESUME_CHECK instruction, to avoid having to handle instrumentation,
signals, and contexts switches in the tier 2 execution engine.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-04-31-01
.. gh-issue: 108487
.. nonce: 1Gbr9k
.. section: Core and Builtins

Move an assert that would cause a spurious crash in a devious case that
should only trigger deoptimization.

..

.. date: 2023-08-25-14-51-06
.. gh-issue: 106176
.. nonce: D1EA2a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use a ``WeakValueDictionary`` to track the lists containing the modules each
thread is currently importing. This helps avoid a reference leak from
keeping the list around longer than necessary. Weakrefs are used as GC can't
interrupt the cleanup.

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-14-54-15
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: 40q-c4
.. section: Core and Builtins

The regen-opcode build stage was removed and its work is now done in
regen-cases.

..

.. date: 2023-08-21-21-13-30
.. gh-issue: 107901
.. nonce: hszvdk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing line number on :opcode:`JUMP_BACKWARD` at the end of a for loop.

..

.. date: 2023-08-18-18-21-27
.. gh-issue: 108113
.. nonce: 1h0poE
.. section: Core and Builtins

The :func:`compile` built-in can now accept a new flag,
``ast.PyCF_OPTIMIZED_AST``, which is similar to ``ast.PyCF_ONLY_AST`` except
that the returned ``AST`` is optimized according to the value of the
``optimize`` argument.

:func:`ast.parse` now accepts an optional argument ``optimize`` which is
passed on to the :func:`compile` built-in. This makes it possible to obtain
an optimized ``AST``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-13-06-05
.. gh-issue: 107971
.. nonce: lPbx04
.. section: Core and Builtins

Opcode IDs are generated from bytecodes.c instead of being hard coded in
opcode.py.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-11-09-50
.. gh-issue: 107944
.. nonce: zQLp3j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message for function calls with bad keyword arguments. Patch
by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-17-18-22
.. gh-issue: 108390
.. nonce: TkBccC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise an exception when setting a non-local event (``RAISE``,
``EXCEPTION_HANDLED``, etc.) in ``sys.monitoring.set_local_events``.

Fixes crash when tracing in recursive calls to Python classes.

..

.. date: 2023-08-11-16-18-19
.. gh-issue: 108035
.. nonce: e2msOD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the ``_PyCFrame`` struct, moving the pointer to the current
interpreter frame back to the threadstate, as it was for 3.10 and earlier.
The ``_PyCFrame`` existed as a performance optimization for tracing. Since
PEP 669 has been implemented, this optimization no longer applies.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-17-36-27
.. gh-issue: 91051
.. nonce: LfaeNW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix abort / segfault when using all eight type watcher slots, on platforms
where ``char`` is signed by default.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-00-00-48
.. gh-issue: 106581
.. nonce: o7zDty
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible assertion failures and missing instrumentation events when
:envvar:`PYTHONUOPS` or :option:`-X uops <-X>` is enabled.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-15-05-27
.. gh-issue: 107526
.. nonce: PB32z-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert converting ``vars``, ``dir``, ``next``, ``getattr``, and ``iter`` to
argument clinic.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-08-31-20
.. gh-issue: 84805
.. nonce: 7JRWua
.. section: Core and Builtins

Autogenerate signature for :c:macro:`METH_NOARGS` and :c:macro:`METH_O`
extension functions.

..

.. date: 2023-08-08-02-46-46
.. gh-issue: 107758
.. nonce: R5kyBI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the ``dump_stack()`` routine used by the ``lltrace`` feature (low-level
interpreter debugging) robust against recursion by ensuring that it never
calls a ``__repr__`` method implemented in Python. Also make the similar
output for Tier-2 uops appear on ``stdout`` (instead of ``stderr``), to
match the ``lltrace`` code in ceval.c.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-15-45-07
.. gh-issue: 107659
.. nonce: QgtQ5M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add docstrings for :func:`ctypes.pointer` and :func:`ctypes.POINTER`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-09-06-56
.. gh-issue: 105848
.. nonce: Drc-1-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify the bytecode so that the actual callable for a :opcode:`CALL` is at a
consistent position on the stack (regardless of whether or not
bound-method-calling optimizations are active).

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-04-47-18
.. gh-issue: 107674
.. nonce: 0sYhR2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed performance regression in ``sys.settrace``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-04-21-25-26
.. gh-issue: 107724
.. nonce: EbBXMr
.. section: Core and Builtins

In pre-release versions of 3.12, up to rc1, the sys.monitoring callback
function for the ``PY_THROW`` event was missing the third, exception
argument. That is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-13-38-14
.. gh-issue: 84436
.. nonce: gl1wHx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Skip reference count modifications for many known immortal objects.

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-11-13-09
.. gh-issue: 107596
.. nonce: T3yPGI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialize subscripting :class:`str` objects by :class:`int` indexes.

..

.. date: 2023-08-02-12-24-51
.. gh-issue: 107080
.. nonce: PNolFU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Trace refs builds (``--with-trace-refs``) were crashing when used with
isolated subinterpreters.  The problematic global state has been isolated to
each interpreter.  Other fixing the crashes, this change does not affect
users.

..

.. date: 2023-08-02-09-55-21
.. gh-issue: 107557
.. nonce: P1z-in
.. section: Core and Builtins

Generate the cases needed for the barebones tier 2 abstract interpreter for
optimization passes in CPython.

..

.. date: 2023-08-01-09-41-36
.. gh-issue: 106608
.. nonce: OFZogw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``_PyUOpExecutorObject`` variable length.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-18-05-11
.. gh-issue: 100964
.. nonce: HluhBJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Clear generators' exception state after ``return`` to break reference
cycles.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-14-18-49
.. gh-issue: 107455
.. nonce: Es53l7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error messages when converting an incompatible type to
:class:`ctypes.c_char_p`, :class:`ctypes.c_wchar_p` and
:class:`ctypes.c_void_p`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-05-20-16
.. gh-issue: 107263
.. nonce: q0IU2M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Increase C recursion limit for functions other than the main interpreter
from 800 to 1500. This should allow functions like ``list.__repr__`` and
``json.dumps`` to handle all the inputs that they could prior to 3.12

..

.. date: 2023-07-29-22-01-30
.. gh-issue: 104584
.. nonce: tINuoA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue which caused incorrect inline caches to be read when running
with :envvar:`PYTHONUOPS` or :option:`-X uops <-X>` enabled.

..

.. date: 2023-07-27-11-47-29
.. gh-issue: 104432
.. nonce: oGHF-z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential unaligned memory access on C APIs involving returned sequences
of ``char *`` pointers within the :mod:`grp` and :mod:`socket` modules.
These were revealed using a ``-fsaniziter=alignment`` build on ARM macOS.
Patch by Christopher Chavez.

..

.. date: 2023-07-27-11-18-04
.. gh-issue: 106078
.. nonce: WEy2Yn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Isolate :mod:`!_decimal` (apply :pep:`687`). Patch by Charlie Zhao.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-21-28-06
.. gh-issue: 106898
.. nonce: 8Wjuiv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add the exception as the third argument to ``PY_UNIND`` callbacks in
``sys.monitoring``. This makes the ``PY_UNWIND`` callback consistent with
the other exception handling callbacks.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-18-53-34
.. gh-issue: 106895
.. nonce: DdEwV8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a ``ValueError`` when a monitoring callback function returns
``DISABLE`` for events that cannot be disabled locally.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-12-18-10
.. gh-issue: 106897
.. nonce: EsGurc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a ``RERAISE`` event to ``sys.monitoring``, which occurs when an
exception is reraise, either explicitly by a plain ``raise`` statement, or
implicitly in an ``except`` or ``finally`` block.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-22-35-35
.. gh-issue: 77377
.. nonce: EHAbXx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that multiprocessing synchronization objects created in a fork
context are not sent to a different process created in a spawn context. This
changes a segfault into an actionable RuntimeError in the parent process.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-15-29-26
.. gh-issue: 106931
.. nonce: kKU1le
.. section: Core and Builtins

Statically allocated string objects are now interned globally instead of
per-interpreter.  This fixes a situation where such a string would only be
interned in a single interpreter. Normal string objects are unaffected.

..

.. date: 2023-07-24-11-11-41
.. gh-issue: 104621
.. nonce: vM8Y_l
.. section: Core and Builtins

Unsupported modules now always fail to be imported.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-21-16-54
.. gh-issue: 107122
.. nonce: VNuNcq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :meth:`dbm.ndbm.ndbm.clear` to :mod:`dbm.ndbm`. Patch By Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-13-07-34
.. gh-issue: 107122
.. nonce: 9HFUyb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :meth:`dbm.gnu.gdbm.clear` to :mod:`dbm.gnu`. Patch By Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-14-35-38
.. gh-issue: 107015
.. nonce: Ghp58t
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ASYNC and AWAIT tokens are removed from the Grammar, which removes the
possibility of making ``async`` and ``await`` soft keywords when using
``feature_version<7`` in :func:`ast.parse`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-14-37-48
.. gh-issue: 106917
.. nonce: 1jWp_m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix classmethod-style :func:`super` method calls (i.e., where the second
argument to :func:`super`, or the implied second argument drawn from
``self/cls`` in the case of zero-arg super, is a type) when the target of
the call is not a classmethod.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-15-15-57
.. gh-issue: 105699
.. nonce: DdqHFg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python no longer crashes due an infrequent race when initializing
per-interpreter interned strings.  The crash would manifest when the
interpreter was finalized.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-12-21-37
.. gh-issue: 105699
.. nonce: 08ywGV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python no longer crashes due to an infrequent race in setting
``Py_FileSystemDefaultEncoding`` and ``Py_FileSystemDefaultEncodeErrors``
(both deprecated), when simultaneously initializing two isolated
subinterpreters.  Now they are only set during runtime initialization.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-01-15-58
.. gh-issue: 106908
.. nonce: cDmcVI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix various hangs, reference leaks, test failures, and tracing/introspection
bugs when running with :envvar:`PYTHONUOPS` or :option:`-X uops <-X>`
enabled.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-16-13-51
.. gh-issue: 106092
.. nonce: bObgRM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segmentation fault caused by a use-after-free bug in ``frame_dealloc``
when the trashcan delays the deallocation of a ``PyFrameObject``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-16-07-55-19
.. gh-issue: 106485
.. nonce: wPb1bH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reduce the number of materialized instances dictionaries by dematerializing
them when possible.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-15-59-07
.. gh-issue: 106719
.. nonce: jmVrsv
.. section: Core and Builtins

No longer suppress arbitrary errors in the ``__annotations__`` getter and
setter in the type and module types.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-14-55-45
.. gh-issue: 106723
.. nonce: KsMufQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Propagate ``frozen_modules`` to multiprocessing spawned process
interpreters.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-11-18-55
.. gh-issue: 104909
.. nonce: DRUsuh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Split :opcode:`LOAD_ATTR_INSTANCE_VALUE` into micro-ops.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-10-48-08
.. gh-issue: 104909
.. nonce: sWjcr2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Split :opcode:`LOAD_GLOBAL` specializations into micro-ops.

..

.. date: 2023-07-10-15-30-45
.. gh-issue: 106597
.. nonce: WAZ14y
.. section: Core and Builtins

A new debug structure of offsets has been added to the ``_PyRuntimeState``
that will help out-of-process debuggers and profilers to obtain the offsets
to relevant interpreter structures in a way that is agnostic of how Python
was compiled and that doesn't require copying the headers. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-07-06-22-46-05
.. gh-issue: 106487
.. nonce: u3KfAD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow the *count* argument of :meth:`str.replace` to be a keyword. Patch by
Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-07-06-00-35-44
.. gh-issue: 96844
.. nonce: kwvoS-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error message of :meth:`list.remove`. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-20-42-54
.. gh-issue: 81283
.. nonce: hfh_MD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compiler now strips indents from docstrings. It reduces ``pyc`` file size 5%
when the module is heavily documented. This change affects to ``__doc__`` so
tools like doctest will be affected.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-09-51-45
.. gh-issue: 106396
.. nonce: DmYp7x
.. section: Core and Builtins

When the format specification of an f-string expression is empty, the parser
now generates an empty :class:`ast.JoinedStr` node for it instead of an
one-element :class:`ast.JoinedStr` with an empty string
:class:`ast.Constant`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-04-50-14
.. gh-issue: 100288
.. nonce: yNQ1ez
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specialize :opcode:`LOAD_ATTR` for non-descriptors on the class. Adds
:opcode:`LOAD_ATTR_NONDESCRIPTOR_WITH_VALUES` and
:opcode:`LOAD_ATTR_NONDESCRIPTOR_NO_DICT`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-11-38-43
.. gh-issue: 106008
.. nonce: HDf1zd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible reference leaks when failing to optimize comparisons with
:const:`None` in the bytecode compiler.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-09-46-41
.. gh-issue: 106145
.. nonce: QC6-Kq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``end_lineno`` and ``end_col_offset`` required on ``type_param`` ast
nodes.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-09-42-56
.. gh-issue: 106213
.. nonce: TCUgzM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Changed the way that Emscripten call trampolines work for compatibility with
Wasm/JS Promise integration.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-15-19-59
.. gh-issue: 106182
.. nonce: cDSFi0
.. section: Core and Builtins

:func:`sys.getfilesystemencoding` and :mod:`sys.getfilesystemencodeerrors`
now return interned Unicode object.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-13-19-20
.. gh-issue: 106210
.. nonce: oE7VMn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Removed Emscripten import trampoline as it was no longer necessary for
Pyodide.

..

.. date: 2023-06-27-00-58-26
.. gh-issue: 104584
.. nonce: Wu-uXy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added a new, experimental, tracing optimizer and interpreter (a.k.a. "tier
2"). This currently pessimizes, so don't use yet -- this is infrastructure
so we can experiment with optimizing passes. To enable it, pass ``-Xuops``
or set ``PYTHONUOPS=1``. To get debug output, set ``PYTHONUOPSDEBUG=N``
where ``N`` is a debug level (0-4, where 0 is no debug output and 4 is
excessively verbose).

..

.. date: 2023-06-24-10-34-27
.. gh-issue: 105775
.. nonce: OqjoGV
.. section: Core and Builtins

:opcode:`LOAD_CLOSURE` is now a pseudo-op.

..

.. date: 2023-06-23-16-51-02
.. gh-issue: 105730
.. nonce: 16haMe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow any callable other than type objects as the condition predicate in
:meth:`BaseExceptionGroup.split` and :meth:`BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-19-16-24
.. gh-issue: 105979
.. nonce: TDP2CU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in :func:`!_imp.get_frozen_object` due to improper exception
handling.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-17-37-35
.. gh-issue: 106003
.. nonce: 2Vc_Tw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new :opcode:`TO_BOOL` instruction, which performs boolean conversions
for :opcode:`POP_JUMP_IF_TRUE`, :opcode:`POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE`, and
:opcode:`UNARY_NOT` (which all expect exact :class:`bool` values now). Also,
modify the oparg of :opcode:`COMPARE_OP` to include an optional "boolean
conversion" flag.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-14-19-17
.. gh-issue: 98931
.. nonce: PPgvSF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure custom :exc:`SyntaxError` error messages are raised for invalid
imports with multiple targets. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-20-10-53-17
.. gh-issue: 105724
.. nonce: d23L4M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve ``assert`` error messages by providing exact error range.

..

.. date: 2023-06-19-11-04-01
.. gh-issue: 105908
.. nonce: 7oanny
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bug where :gh:`99111` breaks future import ``barry_as_FLUFL`` in the
Python REPL.

..

.. date: 2023-06-15-22-11-43
.. gh-issue: 105840
.. nonce: Fum_g_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes when specializing function calls with too many
``__defaults__``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-15-15-54-47
.. gh-issue: 105831
.. nonce: -MC9Zs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an f-string bug, where using a debug expression (the ``=`` sign) that
appears in the last line of a file results to the debug buffer that holds
the expression text being one character too small.

..

.. date: 2023-06-14-22-52-06
.. gh-issue: 105800
.. nonce: hdpPzZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly issue :exc:`SyntaxWarning` in f-strings if invalid sequences are
used. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-12-16-38-31
.. gh-issue: 105340
.. nonce: _jRHXe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Include the comprehension iteration variable in ``locals()`` inside a
module- or class-scope comprehension.

..

.. date: 2023-06-11-09-14-30
.. gh-issue: 105331
.. nonce: nlZvoW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise :exc:`ValueError` if the ``delay`` argument to :func:`asyncio.sleep`
is a NaN (matching :func:`time.sleep`).

..

.. date: 2023-06-10-21-38-49
.. gh-issue: 105587
.. nonce: rL3rzv
.. section: Core and Builtins

The runtime can't guarantee that immortal objects will not be mutated by
Extensions. Thus, this modifies _PyStaticObject_CheckRefcnt to warn instead
of asserting.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-15-25-12
.. gh-issue: 105564
.. nonce: sFdUu4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't include artificil newlines in the ``line`` attribute of tokens in the
APIs of the :mod:`tokenize` module. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-12-59-18
.. gh-issue: 105549
.. nonce: PYfTNp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Tokenize separately ``NUMBER`` and ``NAME`` tokens that are not ambiguous.
Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-11-19-51
.. gh-issue: 105588
.. nonce: Y5ovpY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue that could result in crashes when compiling malformed
:mod:`ast` nodes.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-10-48-17
.. gh-issue: 100987
.. nonce: mK-xny
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow objects other than code objects as the "executable" in internal
frames. In the long term, this can help tools like Cython and PySpy interact
more efficiently. In the shorter term, it allows us to perform some
optimizations more simply.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-10-10-07
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 35VGDd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bugs in the :mod:`builtins` module where exceptions could end up being
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-54-37
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: kqKT3E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug in the compiler where an exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-25-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: ocB7fT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling in :c:func:`PyUnicode_BuildEncodingMap` where an
exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-09-10-15
.. gh-issue: 105486
.. nonce: dev-WS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the repr of ``ParamSpec`` list of args in ``types.GenericAlias``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-21-27-55
.. gh-issue: 105678
.. nonce: wKOr7F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Break the ``MAKE_FUNCTION`` instruction into two parts, ``MAKE_FUNCTION``
which makes the function and ``SET_FUNCTION_ATTRIBUTE`` which sets the
attributes on the function. This makes the stack effect of ``MAKE_FUNCTION``
regular to ease optimization and code generation.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-12-20-59
.. gh-issue: 105435
.. nonce: 6VllI0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix spurious newline character if file ends on a comment without a newline.
Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-17-10-42
.. gh-issue: 105390
.. nonce: DvqI-e
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly raise :exc:`tokenize.TokenError` exceptions instead of
:exc:`SyntaxError` for tokenize errors such as incomplete input. Patch by
Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-11-37-53
.. gh-issue: 105259
.. nonce: E2BGKL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't include newline character for trailing ``NEWLINE`` tokens emitted in
the :mod:`tokenize` module. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-23-38-43
.. gh-issue: 104635
.. nonce: VYZhVh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Eliminate redundant :opcode:`STORE_FAST` instructions in the compiler. Patch
by Donghee Na and Carl Meyer.

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-17-35-50
.. gh-issue: 105324
.. nonce: BqhiJJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the main function of the :mod:`tokenize` module when reading from
``sys.stdin``. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-08-30-49
.. gh-issue: 33092
.. nonce: hZ0xSI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Simplify and speed up interpreter for f-strings. Removes ``FORMAT_VALUE``
opcode. Add ``CONVERT_VALUE``, ``FORMAT_SIMPLE`` and ``FORMAT_WITH_SPEC``
opcode. Compiler emits more efficient sequence for each format expression.

..

.. date: 2023-06-03-04-28-28
.. gh-issue: 105229
.. nonce: stEmfp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove remaining two-codeunit superinstructions. All remaining
superinstructions only take a single codeunit, simplifying instrumentation
and quickening.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-19-37-29
.. gh-issue: 105235
.. nonce: fgFGTi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent out-of-bounds memory access during ``mmap.find()`` calls.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-17-39-19
.. gh-issue: 98963
.. nonce: J4wJgk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore the ability for a subclass of :class:`property` to define
``__slots__`` or otherwise be dict-less by ignoring failures to set a
docstring on such a class.  This behavior had regressed in 3.12beta1.  An
:exc:`AttributeError` where there had not previously been one was disruptive
to existing code.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-15-15-41
.. gh-issue: 104812
.. nonce: dfZiG5
.. section: Core and Builtins

The "pending call" machinery now works for all interpreters, not just the
main interpreter, and runs in all threads, not just the main thread. Some
calls are still only done in the main thread, ergo in the main interpreter.
This change does not affect signal handling nor the existing public C-API
(``Py_AddPendingCall()``), which both still only target the main thread. The
new functionality is meant strictly for internal use for now, since
consequences of its use are not well understood yet outside some very
restricted cases.  This change brings the capability in line with the
intention when the state was made per-interpreter several years ago.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-11-37-12
.. gh-issue: 105194
.. nonce: 4eu56B
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not escape with backslashes f-string format specifiers. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-01-27-35
.. gh-issue: 105229
.. nonce: U05x4G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace some dynamic superinstructions with single instruction equivalents.

..

.. date: 2023-06-01-11-37-03
.. gh-issue: 105162
.. nonce: r8VCXk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bug in generator.close()/throw() where an inner iterator would be
ignored when the outer iterator was instrumented.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-19-35-22
.. gh-issue: 105164
.. nonce: 6Wajph
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure annotations are set up correctly if the only annotation in a block is
within a :keyword:`match` block. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-16-22-29
.. gh-issue: 105148
.. nonce: MOlb1d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``_PyASTOptimizeState`` internal to ast_opt.c. Make ``_PyAST_Optimize``
take two integers instead of a pointer to this struct. This avoids the need
to include pycore_compile.h in ast_opt.c.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-08-10-59
.. gh-issue: 104799
.. nonce: 8kDWti
.. section: Core and Builtins

Attributes of :mod:`ast` nodes that are lists now default to the empty list
if omitted. This means that some code that previously raised
:exc:`TypeError` when the AST node was used will now proceed with the empty
list instead. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-20-30-57
.. gh-issue: 105111
.. nonce: atn0_6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the old trashcan macros ``Py_TRASHCAN_SAFE_BEGIN`` and
``Py_TRASHCAN_SAFE_END``. They should be replaced by the new macros
``Py_TRASHCAN_BEGIN`` and ``Py_TRASHCAN_END``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-08-09-43
.. gh-issue: 105035
.. nonce: OWUlHy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`super` calls on types with custom
:c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_getattro` implementation (e.g. meta-types.)

..

.. date: 2023-05-27-21-50-48
.. gh-issue: 105017
.. nonce: 4sDyDV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Show CRLF lines in the tokenize string attribute in both NL and NEWLINE
tokens. Patch by Marta Gómez.

..

.. date: 2023-05-27-16-57-11
.. gh-issue: 105013
.. nonce: IsDgDY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix handling of multiline parenthesized lambdas in
:func:`inspect.getsource`. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-05-27-16-23-16
.. gh-issue: 105017
.. nonce: KQrsC0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not include an additional final ``NL`` token when parsing files having
CRLF lines. Patch by Marta Gómez.

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-15-16-11
.. gh-issue: 104976
.. nonce: 6dLitD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that trailing ``DEDENT`` :class:`tokenize.TokenInfo` objects emitted
by the :mod:`tokenize` module are reported as in Python 3.11. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-14-09-47
.. gh-issue: 104972
.. nonce: El2UjE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that the ``line`` attribute in :class:`tokenize.TokenInfo` objects in
the :mod:`tokenize` module are always correct. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-21-40-39
.. gh-issue: 104955
.. nonce: LZx7jf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix signature for the new :meth:`~object.__release_buffer__` slot. Patch by
Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-12-10-54
.. gh-issue: 104690
.. nonce: HX3Jou
.. section: Core and Builtins

Starting new threads and process creation through :func:`os.fork` during
interpreter shutdown (such as from :mod:`atexit` handlers) is no longer
supported.  It can lead to race condition between the main Python runtime
thread freeing thread states while internal :mod:`threading` routines are
trying to allocate and use the state of just created threads. Or forked
children trying to use the mid-shutdown runtime and thread state in the
child process.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-10-19-35
.. gh-issue: 104879
.. nonce: v-29NL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when accessing the ``__module__`` attribute of type aliases
defined outside a module. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-09-59-56
.. gh-issue: 104825
.. nonce: mQesie
.. section: Core and Builtins

Tokens emitted by the :mod:`tokenize` module do not include an implicit
``\n`` character in the ``line`` attribute anymore. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-00-36-02
.. gh-issue: 104770
.. nonce: poSkyY
.. section: Core and Builtins

If a generator returns a value upon being closed, the value is now returned
by :meth:`generator.close`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-18-12-48-39
.. gh-issue: 89091
.. nonce: FDzRcW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise :exc:`RuntimeWarning` for unawaited async generator methods like
:meth:`~agen.asend`, :meth:`~agen.athrow` and :meth:`~agen.aclose`. Patch by
Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-04-04-00-40-04
.. gh-issue: 96663
.. nonce: PdR9hK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a better, more introspect-able error message when setting attributes on
classes without a ``__dict__`` and no slot member for the attribute.

..

.. date: 2023-03-26-19-11-10
.. gh-issue: 93627
.. nonce: 0UgwBL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update the Python pickle module implementation to match the C implementation
of the pickle module. For objects setting reduction methods like
:meth:`~object.__reduce_ex__` or :meth:`~object.__reduce__` to ``None``,
pickling will result in a :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. date: 2023-01-13-11-37-41
.. gh-issue: 101006
.. nonce: fuLvn2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling when read :mod:`marshal` data.

..

.. date: 2022-11-10-13-04-35
.. gh-issue: 91095
.. nonce: 4E3Pwn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Specializes calls to most Python classes. Specifically, any class that
inherits from ``object``, or another Python class, and does not override
``__new__``.

The specialized instruction does the following:

1. Creates the object (by calling ``object.__new__``)
2. Pushes a shim frame to the frame stack (to cleanup after ``__init__``)
3. Pushes the frame for ``__init__`` to the frame stack

Speeds up the instantiation of most Python classes.

..

.. date: 2023-10-13-01-31-27
.. gh-issue: 110786
.. nonce: sThp-A
.. section: Library

:mod:`sysconfig`'s CLI now ignores :exc:`BrokenPipeError`, making it exit
normally if its output is being piped and the pipe closes.

..

.. date: 2023-10-13-00-14-17
.. gh-issue: 103480
.. nonce: lmdf1J
.. section: Library

The :mod:`sysconfig` module is now a package, instead of a single-file
module.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-18-43-43
.. gh-issue: 110733
.. nonce: UlrgVm
.. section: Library

Micro-optimization: Avoid calling ``min()``, ``max()`` in
:meth:`BaseEventLoop._run_once`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-15-07-21
.. gh-issue: 94597
.. nonce: NbPC8t
.. section: Library

Added :class:`asyncio.EventLoop` for use with the :func:`asyncio.run`
*loop_factory* kwarg to avoid calling the asyncio policy system.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-11-00-11
.. gh-issue: 110682
.. nonce: bXRFaX
.. section: Library

:func:`runtime-checkable protocols <typing.runtime_checkable>` used to
consider ``__match_args__`` a protocol member in ``__instancecheck__`` if it
was present on the protocol. Now, this attribute is ignored if it is
present.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-22-54-56
.. gh-issue: 110488
.. nonce: 2I7OiZ
.. section: Library

Fix a couple of issues in :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.with_name`: a single dot
was incorrectly considered a valid name, and in :class:`PureWindowsPath`, a
name with an NTFS alternate data stream, like ``a:b``, was incorrectly
considered invalid.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-10-46-55
.. gh-issue: 110590
.. nonce: fatz-h
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :meth:`!_sre.compile` where :exc:`TypeError` would be
overwritten by :exc:`OverflowError` when the *code* argument was a list of
non-ints.

..

.. date: 2023-10-09-19-09-32
.. gh-issue: 65052
.. nonce: C2mRlo
.. section: Library

Prevent :mod:`pdb` from crashing when trying to display undisplayable
objects

..

.. date: 2023-10-08-18-15-02
.. gh-issue: 110519
.. nonce: RDGe8-
.. section: Library

Deprecation warning about non-integer number in :mod:`gettext` now always
refers to the line in the user code where gettext function or method is
used. Previously it could refer to a line in ``gettext`` code.

..

.. date: 2023-10-07-21-12-28
.. gh-issue: 89902
.. nonce: dCokZj
.. section: Library

Deprecate non-standard format specifier "N" for :class:`decimal.Decimal`. It
was not documented and only supported in the C implementation.

..

.. date: 2023-10-07-13-50-12
.. gh-issue: 110378
.. nonce: Y4L8fl
.. section: Library

:func:`~contextlib.contextmanager` and
:func:`~contextlib.asynccontextmanager` context managers now close an
invalid underlying generator object that yields more then one value.

..

.. date: 2023-10-07-00-18-40
.. gh-issue: 106670
.. nonce: kCGyRc
.. section: Library

In :mod:`pdb`, set convenience variable ``$_exception`` for post mortem
debugging.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-18-56-29
.. gh-issue: 110365
.. nonce: LCxiau
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`termios.tcsetattr` bug that was overwriting existing errors
during parsing integers from ``term`` list.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-15-17-03
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: 9DYOMD
.. section: Library

Slightly improve the import time of several standard-library modules by
deferring imports of :mod:`warnings` within those modules. Patch by Alex
Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-14-07-05
.. gh-issue: 110273
.. nonce: QaDUmS
.. section: Library

:func:`dataclasses.replace` now raises TypeError instead of ValueError if
specify keyword argument for a field declared with init=False or miss
keyword argument for required InitVar field.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-00-04-26
.. gh-issue: 110249
.. nonce: K0mMrs
.. section: Library

Add ``--inline-caches`` flag to ``dis`` command line.

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-15-40-10
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: iB0peK
.. section: Library

Fix a Python 3.12 regression in the import time of :mod:`random`. Patch by
Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-15-07-28
.. gh-issue: 110222
.. nonce: zl_oHh
.. section: Library

Add support of struct sequence objects in :func:`copy.replace`. Patched by
Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2023-10-01-01-47-21
.. gh-issue: 109649
.. nonce: BizOaD
.. section: Library

:mod:`multiprocessing`, :mod:`concurrent.futures`, :mod:`compileall`:
Replace :func:`os.cpu_count` with :func:`os.process_cpu_count` to select the
default number of worker threads and processes. Get the CPU affinity if
supported. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-30-12-50-47
.. gh-issue: 110150
.. nonce: 9j0Ij5
.. section: Library

Fix base case handling in statistics.quantiles.  Now allows a single data
point.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-53-11
.. gh-issue: 110036
.. nonce: fECxTj
.. section: Library

On Windows, multiprocessing ``Popen.terminate()`` now catches
:exc:`PermissionError` and get the process exit code. If the process is
still running, raise again the :exc:`PermissionError`. Otherwise, the
process terminated as expected: store its exit code. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-50-33
.. gh-issue: 110038
.. nonce: nx_gCu
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue that caused :meth:`KqueueSelector.select` to not return all
the ready events in some cases when a file descriptor is registered for both
read and write.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-08-02
.. gh-issue: 110045
.. nonce: 0YIGKv
.. section: Library

Update the :mod:`symtable` module to support the new scopes introduced by
:pep:`695`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-12-32-57
.. gh-issue: 88402
.. nonce: hoa3Gx
.. section: Library

Add new variables to :py:meth:`sysconfig.get_config_vars` on Windows:
``LIBRARY``, ``LDLIBRARY``, ``LIBDIR``, ``SOABI``, and ``Py_NOGIL``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-23-00-37
.. gh-issue: 109631
.. nonce: eWSqpO
.. section: Library

:mod:`re` functions such as :func:`re.findall`, :func:`re.split`,
:func:`re.search` and :func:`re.sub` which perform short repeated matches
can now be interrupted by user.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-10-47-22
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: TUHrId
.. section: Library

Reduce the import time of :mod:`email.utils` by around 43%. This results in
the import time of :mod:`email.message` falling by around 18%, which in turn
reduces the import time of :mod:`importlib.metadata` by around 6%. Patch by
Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-09-59-59
.. gh-issue: 109818
.. nonce: dLRtT-
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`reprlib.recursive_repr` not copying ``__type_params__`` from
decorated function.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-02-11-14
.. gh-issue: 109047
.. nonce: b1TrqG
.. section: Library

:mod:`concurrent.futures`: The *executor manager thread* now catches
exceptions when adding an item to the *call queue*. During Python
finalization, creating a new thread can now raise :exc:`RuntimeError`. Catch
the exception and call ``terminate_broken()`` in this case. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-24-16-43-33
.. gh-issue: 109782
.. nonce: gMC_7z
.. section: Library

Ensure the signature of :func:`os.path.isdir` is identical on all platforms.
Patch by Amin Alaee.

..

.. date: 2023-09-24-13-28-35
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: 9IFU0B
.. section: Library

Improve import time of :mod:`functools` by around 13%. Patch by Alex
Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-09-24-06-04-14
.. gh-issue: 109590
.. nonce: 9EMofC
.. section: Library

:func:`shutil.which` will prefer files with an extension in ``PATHEXT`` if
the given mode includes ``os.X_OK`` on win32. If no ``PATHEXT`` match is
found, a file without an extension in ``PATHEXT`` can be returned. This
change will have :func:`shutil.which` act more similarly to previous
behavior in Python 3.11.

..

.. date: 2023-09-23-12-47-45
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: 9wZBfs
.. section: Library

Reduce the import time of :mod:`enum` by over 50%. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-09-22-20-16-44
.. gh-issue: 109593
.. nonce: LboaNM
.. section: Library

Avoid deadlocking on a reentrant call to the multiprocessing resource
tracker. Such a reentrant call, though unlikely, can happen if a GC pass
invokes the finalizer for a multiprocessing object such as SemLock.

..

.. date: 2023-09-21-19-42-22
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: bL3iLH
.. section: Library

Reduce the import time of :mod:`typing` by around a third. Patch by Alex
Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-09-21-16-21-19
.. gh-issue: 109649
.. nonce: YYCjAF
.. section: Library

Add :func:`os.process_cpu_count` function to get the number of logical CPUs
usable by the calling thread of the current process. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-21-14-26-44
.. gh-issue: 74481
.. nonce: KAUDcD
.. section: Library

Add ``set_error_mode`` related constants in ``msvcrt`` module in Python
debug build.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-17-45-46
.. gh-issue: 109613
.. nonce: P13ogN
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`os.stat` and :meth:`os.DirEntry.stat`: check for exceptions.
Previously, on Python built in debug mode, these functions could trigger a
fatal Python error (and abort the process) when a function succeeded with an
exception set. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-07-38-14
.. gh-issue: 109599
.. nonce: IaSLJz
.. section: Library

Expose the type of PyCapsule objects as ``types.CapsuleType``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-17-56-24
.. gh-issue: 109109
.. nonce: WJvvX2
.. section: Library

You can now get the raw TLS certificate chains from TLS connections via
:meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.get_verified_chain` and
:meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.get_unverified_chain` methods.

Contributed by Mateusz Nowak.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-01-22-43
.. gh-issue: 109559
.. nonce: ijaycU
.. section: Library

Update :mod:`unicodedata` database to Unicode 15.1.0.

..

.. date: 2023-09-18-07-43-22
.. gh-issue: 109543
.. nonce: 1tOGoV
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary :func:`hasattr` check during :data:`typing.TypedDict`
creation.

..

.. date: 2023-09-16-15-44-16
.. gh-issue: 109495
.. nonce: m2H5Bk
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary extra ``__slots__`` in :class:`~datetime.datetime`\'s pure
python implementation to reduce memory size, as they are defined in the
superclass. Patch by James Hilton-Balfe

..

.. date: 2023-09-15-17-12-53
.. gh-issue: 109461
.. nonce: VNFPTK
.. section: Library

:mod:`logging`: Use a context manager for lock acquisition.

..

.. date: 2023-09-15-12-20-23
.. gh-issue: 109096
.. nonce: VksX1D
.. section: Library

:class:`!http.server.CGIHTTPRequestHandler` has been deprecated for removal
in 3.15.  Its design is old and the web world has long since moved beyond
CGI.

..

.. date: 2023-09-15-10-42-30
.. gh-issue: 109409
.. nonce: RlffA3
.. section: Library

Fix error when it was possible to inherit a frozen dataclass from multiple
parents some of which were possibly not frozen.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-17-22-44
.. gh-issue: 109375
.. nonce: ijJHZ9
.. section: Library

The :mod:`pdb` ``alias`` command now prevents registering aliases without
arguments.

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-13-01-55
.. gh-issue: 109319
.. nonce: YaCMtW
.. section: Library

Deprecate the ``dis.HAVE_ARGUMENT`` field in favour of ``dis.hasarg``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-00-32-18
.. gh-issue: 107219
.. nonce: 3zqyFT
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in ``concurrent.futures``. When a process in the
process pool was terminated abruptly (while the future was running or
pending), close the connection write end. If the call queue is blocked on
sending bytes to a worker process, closing the connection write end
interrupts the send, so the queue can be closed. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-20-23-20
.. gh-issue: 66143
.. nonce: 71xvgL
.. section: Library

The :class:`codecs.CodecInfo` object has been made copyable and pickleable.
Patched by Robert Lehmann and Furkan Onder.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-17-09-54
.. gh-issue: 109187
.. nonce: dIayNW
.. section: Library

:meth:`pathlib.Path.resolve` now treats symlink loops like other errors: in
strict mode, :exc:`OSError` is raised, and in non-strict mode, no exception
is raised.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-15-08-37
.. gh-issue: 50644
.. nonce: JUAZOh
.. section: Library

Attempts to pickle or create a shallow or deep copy of :mod:`codecs` streams
now raise a TypeError. Previously, copying failed with a RecursionError,
while pickling produced wrong results that eventually caused unpickling to
fail with a RecursionError.

..

.. date: 2023-09-09-09-05-41
.. gh-issue: 109174
.. nonce: OJea5s
.. section: Library

Add support of :class:`types.SimpleNamespace` in :func:`copy.replace`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-22-26-26
.. gh-issue: 109164
.. nonce: -9BFWR
.. section: Library

:mod:`pdb`: Replace :mod:`getopt` with :mod:`argparse` for parsing command
line arguments.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-19-44-01
.. gh-issue: 109151
.. nonce: GkzkQu
.. section: Library

Enable ``readline`` editing features in the :ref:`sqlite3 command-line
interface <sqlite3-cli>` (``python -m sqlite3``).

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-12-09-55
.. gh-issue: 108987
.. nonce: x5AIG8
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`_thread.start_new_thread` race condition. If a thread is created
during Python finalization, the newly spawned thread now exits immediately
instead of trying to access freed memory and lead to a crash. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-19-33-41
.. gh-issue: 108682
.. nonce: 35Xnc5
.. section: Library

Enum: require ``names=()`` or ``type=...`` to create an empty enum using the
functional syntax.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-14-47-28
.. gh-issue: 109033
.. nonce: piUzDx
.. section: Library

Exceptions raised by os.utime builtin function now include the related
filename

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-06-17-23
.. gh-issue: 108843
.. nonce: WJMhsS
.. section: Library

Fix an issue in :func:`ast.unparse` when unparsing f-strings containing many
quote types.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-04-37-52
.. gh-issue: 108469
.. nonce: kusj40
.. section: Library

:func:`ast.unparse` now supports new :term:`f-string` syntax introduced in
Python 3.12. Note that the :term:`f-string` quotes are reselected for
simplicity under the new syntax. (Patch by Steven Sun)

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-13-14-08
.. gh-issue: 108751
.. nonce: 2itqwe
.. section: Library

Add :func:`copy.replace` function which allows to create a modified copy of
an object. It supports named tuples, dataclasses, and many other objects.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-20-10-28
.. gh-issue: 108682
.. nonce: c2gzLQ
.. section: Library

Enum: raise :exc:`TypeError` if ``super().__new__()`` is called from a
custom ``__new__``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-29-11-29-15
.. gh-issue: 108278
.. nonce: -UhsnJ
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing the callback callable by keyword for the following
:class:`sqlite3.Connection` APIs:

* :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_authorizer`
* :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_progress_handler`
* :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_trace_callback`

The affected parameters will become positional-only in Python 3.15.

Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-12-35-39
.. gh-issue: 105829
.. nonce: kyYhWI
.. section: Library

Fix concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor deadlock

..

.. date: 2023-08-26-08-38-57
.. gh-issue: 108295
.. nonce: Pn0QRM
.. section: Library

Fix crashes related to use of weakrefs on :data:`typing.TypeVar`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-25-00-14-34
.. gh-issue: 108463
.. nonce: mQApp_
.. section: Library

Make expressions/statements work as expected in pdb

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-22-08-32
.. gh-issue: 108277
.. nonce: KLV-6T
.. section: Library

Add :func:`os.timerfd_create`, :func:`os.timerfd_settime`,
:func:`os.timerfd_gettime`, :func:`os.timerfd_settime_ns`, and
:func:`os.timerfd_gettime_ns` to provide a low level interface for Linux's
timer notification file descriptor.

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-17-34-39
.. gh-issue: 107811
.. nonce: 3Fng72
.. section: Library

:mod:`tarfile`: extraction of members with overly large UID or GID (e.g. on
an OS with 32-bit :c:type:`!id_t`) now fails in the same way as failing to
set the ID.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-22-29-42
.. gh-issue: 64662
.. nonce: jHl_Bt
.. section: Library

Fix support for virtual tables in :meth:`sqlite3.Connection.iterdump`. Patch
by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-17-27-12
.. gh-issue: 108111
.. nonce: N7a4u_
.. section: Library

Fix a regression introduced in GH-101251 for 3.12, resulting in an incorrect
offset calculation in :meth:`gzip.GzipFile.seek`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-16-18-49
.. gh-issue: 108294
.. nonce: KEeUcM
.. section: Library

:func:`time.sleep` now raises an auditing event.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-13-51-10
.. gh-issue: 108278
.. nonce: 11d_qG
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing name, number of arguments, and the callable as keyword
arguments, for the following :class:`sqlite3.Connection` APIs:

* :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.create_function`
* :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.create_aggregate`

The affected parameters will become positional-only in Python 3.15.

Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-12-05-47
.. gh-issue: 108322
.. nonce: kf3NJX
.. section: Library

Speed-up NormalDist.samples() by using the inverse CDF method instead of
calling random.gauss().

..

.. date: 2023-08-18-22-58-07
.. gh-issue: 83417
.. nonce: 61J4yM
.. section: Library

Add the ability for venv to create a ``.gitignore`` file which causes the
created environment to be ignored by Git. It is on by default when venv is
called via its CLI.

..

.. date: 2023-08-17-14-45-25
.. gh-issue: 105736
.. nonce: NJsH7r
.. section: Library

Harmonized the pure Python version of :class:`~collections.OrderedDict` with
the C version. Now, both versions set up their internal state in
``__new__``.  Formerly, the pure Python version did the set up in
``__init__``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-17-12-59-35
.. gh-issue: 108083
.. nonce: 9J7UcT
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in the constructor of :mod:`sqlite3.Connection` and
:meth:`sqlite3.Connection.close` where exceptions could be leaked. Patch by
Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-16-21-20-55
.. gh-issue: 107932
.. nonce: I7hFsp
.. section: Library

Fix ``dis`` module to properly report and display bytecode that do not have
source lines.

..

.. date: 2023-08-16-14-30-13
.. gh-issue: 105539
.. nonce: 29lA6c
.. section: Library

:mod:`sqlite3` now emits an :exc:`ResourceWarning` if a
:class:`sqlite3.Connection` object is not :meth:`closed
<sqlite3.connection.close>` explicitly. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-16-00-24-07
.. gh-issue: 107995
.. nonce: TlTp5t
.. section: Library

The ``__module__`` attribute on instances of
:class:`functools.cached_property` is now set to the name of the module in
which the cached_property is defined, rather than "functools". This means
that doctests in ``cached_property`` docstrings are now properly collected
by the :mod:`doctest` module. Patch by Tyler Smart.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-18-20-00
.. gh-issue: 107963
.. nonce: 20g5BG
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`multiprocessing.set_forkserver_preload` to check the given list
of modules names. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-23-11-11
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: 71HMym
.. section: Library

Fixes :func:`os.path.normpath` to handle embedded null characters without
truncating the path.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-20-18-59
.. gh-issue: 81555
.. nonce: cWdP4a
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.dom.minidom` now only quotes ``"`` in attributes.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-20-01-14
.. gh-issue: 50002
.. nonce: E-bpj8
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.dom.minidom` now preserves whitespaces in attributes.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-19-49-02
.. gh-issue: 93057
.. nonce: 5nJwO5
.. section: Library

Passing more than one positional argument to :func:`sqlite3.connect` and the
:class:`sqlite3.Connection` constructor is deprecated. The remaining
parameters will become keyword-only in Python 3.15. Patch by Erlend E.
Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-17-15-59
.. gh-issue: 76913
.. nonce: LLD0rT
.. section: Library

Add *merge_extra* parameter/feature to :class:`logging.LoggerAdapter`

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-11-18-13
.. gh-issue: 107913
.. nonce: 4ooY6i
.. section: Library

Fix possible losses of ``errno`` and ``winerror`` values in :exc:`OSError`
exceptions if they were cleared or modified by the cleanup code before
creating the exception object.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-17-36-22
.. gh-issue: 107845
.. nonce: dABiMJ
.. section: Library

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now takes the location of symlinks into account
when determining their target, so it will no longer reject some valid
tarballs with ``LinkOutsideDestinationError``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-15-37-20
.. gh-issue: 107812
.. nonce: CflAXa
.. section: Library

Extend socket's netlink support to the FreeBSD platform.

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-13-49-37
.. gh-issue: 107805
.. nonce: ezem0k
.. section: Library

Fix signatures of module-level generated functions in :mod:`turtle`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-08-19-57-45
.. gh-issue: 107782
.. nonce: mInjFE
.. section: Library

:mod:`pydoc` is now able to show signatures which are not representable in
Python, e.g. for ``getattr`` and ``dict.pop``.

..

.. date: 2023-08-08-16-09-59
.. gh-issue: 56166
.. nonce: WUMhYG
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing optional arguments *maxsplit*, *count* and *flags* in
module-level functions :func:`re.split`, :func:`re.sub` and :func:`re.subn`
as positional. They should only be passed by keyword.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-14-24-42
.. gh-issue: 107710
.. nonce: xfOCfj
.. section: Library

Speed up :func:`logging.getHandlerNames`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-14-12-07
.. gh-issue: 107715
.. nonce: 238r2f
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`doctest.DocTestFinder.find` in presence of class names with
special characters. Patch by Gertjan van Zwieten.

..

.. date: 2023-08-06-15-29-00
.. gh-issue: 100814
.. nonce: h195gW
.. section: Library

Passing a callable object as an option value to a Tkinter image now raises
the expected TclError instead of an AttributeError.

..

.. date: 2023-08-06-10-52-12
.. gh-issue: 72684
.. nonce: Ls2mSf
.. section: Library

Add :mod:`tkinter` widget methods: :meth:`!tk_busy_hold`,
:meth:`!tk_busy_configure`, :meth:`!tk_busy_cget`, :meth:`!tk_busy_forget`,
:meth:`!tk_busy_current`, and :meth:`!tk_busy_status`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-05-10-41
.. gh-issue: 106684
.. nonce: P9zRXb
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`ResourceWarning` when :class:`asyncio.StreamWriter` is not
closed leading to memory leaks. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-08-04-19-00-53
.. gh-issue: 107465
.. nonce: Vc1Il3
.. section: Library

Add :meth:`pathlib.Path.from_uri` classmethod.

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-12-52-19
.. gh-issue: 107077
.. nonce: -pzHD6
.. section: Library

Seems that in some conditions, OpenSSL will return ``SSL_ERROR_SYSCALL``
instead of ``SSL_ERROR_SSL`` when a certification verification has failed,
but the error parameters will still contain ``ERR_LIB_SSL`` and
``SSL_R_CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED``. We are now detecting this situation and
raising the appropriate ``ssl.SSLCertVerificationError``. Patch by Pablo
Galindo

..

.. date: 2023-08-03-11-31-11
.. gh-issue: 107576
.. nonce: pO_s9I
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`types.get_original_bases` to only return :attr:`!__orig_bases__`
if it is present on ``cls`` directly. Patch by James Hilton-Balfe.

..

.. date: 2023-08-01-21-43-58
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: cl2ajS
.. section: Library

Remove ``opcode.is_pseudo``, ``opcode.MIN_PSEUDO_OPCODE`` and
``opcode.MAX_PSEUDO_OPCODE``, which were added in 3.12, were never
documented and were not intended to be used externally.

..

.. date: 2023-08-01-15-17-20
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: vMbmj_
.. section: Library

:data:`!opcode.ENABLE_SPECIALIZATION` (which was added in 3.12 but never
documented or intended for external usage) is moved to
:data:`!_opcode.ENABLE_SPECIALIZATION` where tests can access it.

..

.. date: 2023-07-31-07-36-24
.. gh-issue: 107396
.. nonce: 3_Kh6D
.. section: Library

tarfiles; Fixed use before assignment of self.exception for gzip
decompression

..

.. date: 2023-07-29-02-36-50
.. gh-issue: 107409
.. nonce: HG27Nu
.. section: Library

Set :attr:`!__wrapped__` attribute in :func:`reprlib.recursive_repr`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-29-02-01-24
.. gh-issue: 107406
.. nonce: ze6sQP
.. section: Library

Implement new :meth:`__repr__` method for :class:`struct.Struct`. Now it
returns ``Struct(<format repr>)``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-28-14-56-35
.. gh-issue: 107369
.. nonce: bvTq8F
.. section: Library

Optimize :func:`textwrap.indent`. It is ~30% faster for large input. Patch
by Inada Naoki.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-22-52-48
.. gh-issue: 78722
.. nonce: 6SKBLt
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :meth:`pathlib.Path.iterdir` did not raise :exc:`OSError`
until iterated.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-13-05-32
.. gh-issue: 105578
.. nonce: XAQtyR
.. section: Library

Deprecate :class:`typing.AnyStr` in favor of the new Type Parameter syntax.
See PEP 695.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-12-26-23
.. gh-issue: 62519
.. nonce: w8-81X
.. section: Library

Make :func:`gettext.pgettext` search plural definitions when translation is
not found.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-21-57-34
.. gh-issue: 107089
.. nonce: Dnget2
.. section: Library

Shelves opened with :func:`shelve.open` have a much faster :meth:`clear`
method. Patch by James Cave.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-16-44-58
.. gh-issue: 82500
.. nonce: cQYoPj
.. section: Library

Fix overflow on 32-bit systems with :mod:`asyncio` :func:`os.sendfile`
implementation.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-51-33
.. gh-issue: 83006
.. nonce: 21zaCz
.. section: Library

Document behavior of :func:`shutil.disk_usage` for non-mounted filesystems
on Unix.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-14-29-34
.. gh-issue: 65495
.. nonce: fw84qM
.. section: Library

Use lowercase ``mail from`` and ``rcpt to`` in :class:`smptlib.SMTP`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-13-09-28
.. gh-issue: 106186
.. nonce: EIsUNG
.. section: Library

Do not report ``MultipartInvariantViolationDefect`` defect when the
:class:`email.parser.Parser` class is used to parse emails with
``headersonly=True``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-12-53-53
.. gh-issue: 105002
.. nonce: gkfsW0
.. section: Library

Fix invalid result from :meth:`PurePath.relative_to` method when attempting
to walk a "``..``" segment in *other* with *walk_up* enabled. A
:exc:`ValueError` exception is now raised in this case.

..

.. date: 2023-07-20-06-00-35
.. gh-issue: 106739
.. nonce: W1hygr
.. section: Library

Add the ``rtype_cache`` to the warning message (as an addition to the type
of leaked objects and the number of leaked objects already included in the
message) to make debugging leaked objects easier when the multiprocessing
resource tracker process finds leaked objects at shutdown. This helps more
quickly identify what was leaked and/or why the leaked object was not
properly cleaned up.

..

.. date: 2023-07-19-10-45-24
.. gh-issue: 106751
.. nonce: 3HJ1of
.. section: Library

Optimize :meth:`SelectSelector.select` for many iteration case. Patch By
Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-07-19-09-11-08
.. gh-issue: 106751
.. nonce: U9nD_B
.. section: Library

Optimize :meth:`!_PollLikeSelector.select` for many iteration case.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-23-05-12
.. gh-issue: 106751
.. nonce: tVvzN_
.. section: Library

Optimize :meth:`KqueueSelector.select` for many iteration case. Patch By
Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2023-07-17-21-45-15
.. gh-issue: 106831
.. nonce: RqVq9X
.. section: Library

Fix potential missing ``NULL`` check of ``d2i_SSL_SESSION`` result in
``_ssl.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-17-16-46-00
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: fek_Nn
.. section: Library

The various opcode lists in the :mod:`dis` module are now generated from
bytecodes.c instead of explicitly constructed in opcode.py.

..

.. date: 2023-07-16-23-59-33
.. gh-issue: 106727
.. nonce: bk3uCu
.. section: Library

Make :func:`inspect.getsource` smarter for class for same name definitions

..

.. date: 2023-07-16-10-40-34
.. gh-issue: 106789
.. nonce: NvyE3C
.. section: Library

Remove import of :mod:`pprint` from :mod:`sysconfig`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-15-12-52-50
.. gh-issue: 105726
.. nonce: NGthO8
.. section: Library

Added ``__slots__`` to :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager` and
:class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager` so that child classes can
use ``__slots__``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-15-10-24-56
.. gh-issue: 106774
.. nonce: FJcqCj
.. section: Library

Update the bundled copy of pip to version 23.2.1.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-20-31-09
.. gh-issue: 106751
.. nonce: 52F6yQ
.. section: Library

:mod:`selectors`: Optimize ``EpollSelector.select()`` code by moving some
code outside of the loop.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-16-54-13
.. gh-issue: 106752
.. nonce: BT1Yxw
.. section: Library

Fixed several bugs in zipfile.Path, including: in
:meth:`zipfile.Path.match`, Windows separators are no longer honored (and
never were meant to be); Fixed ``name``/``suffix``/``suffixes``/``stem``
operations when no filename is present and the Path is not at the root of
the zipfile; Reworked glob for performance and more correct matching
behavior.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-14-53-58
.. gh-issue: 105293
.. nonce: kimf_i
.. section: Library

Remove call to ``SSL_CTX_set_session_id_context`` during client side context
creation in the :mod:`ssl` module.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-01-47-39
.. gh-issue: 106734
.. nonce: eMYSoz
.. section: Library

Disable tab completion in multiline mode of :mod:`pdb`

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-16-04-15
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: pYSwMj
.. section: Library

Expose opcode metadata through :mod:`!_opcode`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-10-59-08
.. gh-issue: 106670
.. nonce: goQ2Sy
.. section: Library

Add the new ``exceptions`` command to the Pdb debugger. It makes it possible
to move between chained exceptions when using post mortem debugging.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-04-58-45
.. gh-issue: 106602
.. nonce: dGCcXe
.. section: Library

Add __copy__ and __deepcopy__ in :mod:`enum`

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-03-04-45
.. gh-issue: 106664
.. nonce: ZeUG78
.. section: Library

:mod:`selectors`: Add ``_SelectorMapping.get()`` method and optimize
``_SelectorMapping.__getitem__()``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-16-36-22
.. gh-issue: 106628
.. nonce: Kx8Zvc
.. section: Library

Speed up parsing of emails by about 20% by not compiling a new regular
expression for every single email.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-12-34-04
.. gh-issue: 89427
.. nonce: GOkCp9
.. section: Library

Set the environment variable ``VIRTUAL_ENV_PROMPT`` at :mod:`venv`
activation, even when ``VIRTUAL_ENV_DISABLE_PROMPT`` is set.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-09-25-40
.. gh-issue: 106530
.. nonce: VgXrMx
.. section: Library

Revert a change to :func:`colorsys.rgb_to_hls` that caused division by zero
for certain almost-white inputs.  Patch by Terry Jan Reedy.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-08-56-40
.. gh-issue: 106584
.. nonce: g-SBtC
.. section: Library

Fix exit code for ``unittest`` if all tests are skipped. Patch by Egor
Eliseev.

..

.. date: 2023-07-09-13-10-54
.. gh-issue: 106566
.. nonce: NN35-U
.. section: Library

Optimize ``(?!)`` (pattern which always fails) in regular expressions.

..

.. date: 2023-07-09-01-59-24
.. gh-issue: 106554
.. nonce: 37c53J
.. section: Library

:mod:`selectors`: Reduce Selector overhead by using a ``dict.get()`` to
lookup file descriptors.

..

.. date: 2023-07-09-00-36-33
.. gh-issue: 106558
.. nonce: Zqsj6F
.. section: Library

Remove ref cycle in callers of
:func:`~multiprocessing.managers.convert_to_error` by deleting ``result``
from scope in a ``finally`` block.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-21-15-17
.. gh-issue: 100502
.. nonce: Iici1B
.. section: Library

Add :attr:`pathlib.PurePath.pathmod` class attribute that stores the
implementation of :mod:`os.path` used for low-level path operations: either
``posixpath`` or ``ntpath``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-18-22-07
.. gh-issue: 106527
.. nonce: spHQ0W
.. section: Library

Reduce overhead to add and remove :mod:`asyncio` readers and writers.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-17-44-03
.. gh-issue: 106524
.. nonce: XkBV8h
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :func:`!_sre.template` with templates containing invalid group
indices.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-16-19-59
.. gh-issue: 106531
.. nonce: eMfNm8
.. section: Library

Removed ``_legacy`` and the names it provided from ``importlib.resources``:
``Resource``, ``contents``, ``is_resource``, ``open_binary``, ``open_text``,
``path``, ``read_binary``, and ``read_text``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-14-52-31
.. gh-issue: 106052
.. nonce: ak8nbs
.. section: Library

:mod:`re` module: fix the matching of possessive quantifiers in the case of
a subpattern containing backtracking.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-13-47-28
.. gh-issue: 106510
.. nonce: 9n5BdC
.. section: Library

Improve debug output for atomic groups in regular expressions.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-03-05-58
.. gh-issue: 106503
.. nonce: ltfeiH
.. section: Library

Fix ref cycle in :class:`!asyncio._SelectorSocketTransport` by removing
``_write_ready`` in ``close``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-14-34-10
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: HU5u89
.. section: Library

Fix flag mask inversion when unnamed flags exist.

..

.. date: 2023-07-05-13-08-23
.. gh-issue: 90876
.. nonce: Qvlkfl
.. section: Library

Prevent :mod:`multiprocessing.spawn` from failing to *import* in
environments where ``sys.executable`` is ``None``.  This regressed in 3.11
with the addition of support for path-like objects in multiprocessing.

..

.. date: 2023-07-04-07-25-30
.. gh-issue: 106403
.. nonce: GmefbV
.. section: Library

Instances of :class:`typing.TypeVar`, :class:`typing.ParamSpec`,
:class:`typing.ParamSpecArgs`, :class:`typing.ParamSpecKwargs`, and
:class:`typing.TypeVarTuple` once again support weak references, fixing a
regression introduced in Python 3.12.0 beta 1. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-20-23-56
.. gh-issue: 89812
.. nonce: cFkDOE
.. section: Library

Add private ``pathlib._PathBase`` class, which provides experimental support
for virtual filesystems, and may be made public in a future version of
Python.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-15-09-44
.. gh-issue: 106292
.. nonce: 3npldV
.. section: Library

Check for an instance-dict cached value in the :meth:`__get__` method of
:func:`functools.cached_property`. This better matches the pre-3.12 behavior
and improves compatibility for users subclassing
:func:`functools.cached_property` and adding a :meth:`__set__` method.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-03-46-20
.. gh-issue: 106350
.. nonce: LLcTEe
.. section: Library

Detect possible memory allocation failure in the libtommath function
:c:func:`mp_init` used by the ``_tkinter`` module.

..

.. date: 2023-07-02-10-56-41
.. gh-issue: 106330
.. nonce: QSkIUH
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect matching of empty paths in :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.match`.
This bug was introduced in Python 3.12.0 beta 1.

..

.. date: 2023-07-01-16-51-55
.. gh-issue: 106309
.. nonce: hSlB17
.. section: Library

Deprecate :func:`typing.no_type_check_decorator`. No major type checker ever
added support for this decorator. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-07-01-16-40-54
.. gh-issue: 102541
.. nonce: C1ahtk
.. section: Library

Make :func:`pydoc.doc` catch bad module :exc:`ImportError`
when output stream is not ``None``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-16-42-44
.. gh-issue: 106263
.. nonce: tk-t93
.. section: Library

Fix crash when calling ``repr`` with a manually constructed SignalDict
object. Patch by Charlie Zhao.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-15-10-44
.. gh-issue: 106236
.. nonce: EAIX4l
.. section: Library

Replace ``assert`` statements with ``raise RuntimeError`` in
:mod:`threading`, so that ``_DummyThread`` cannot be joined even with
``-OO``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-29-12-40-52
.. gh-issue: 106238
.. nonce: VulKb9
.. section: Library

Fix rare concurrency bug in lock acquisition by the logging package.

..

.. date: 2023-06-27-23-22-37
.. gh-issue: 106152
.. nonce: ya5jBT
.. section: Library

Added PY_THROW event hook for :mod:`cProfile` for generators

..

.. date: 2023-06-25-12-28-55
.. gh-issue: 106075
.. nonce: W7tMRb
.. section: Library

Added ``asyncio.taskgroups.__all__`` to ``asyncio.__all__`` for export in
star imports.

..

.. date: 2023-06-25-06-57-24
.. gh-issue: 104527
.. nonce: TJEUkd
.. section: Library

Zipapp will now skip over appending an archive to itself.

..

.. date: 2023-06-23-22-52-24
.. gh-issue: 106046
.. nonce: OdLiLJ
.. section: Library

Improve the error message from :func:`os.fspath` if called on an object
where ``__fspath__`` is set to ``None``. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-15-21-11
.. gh-issue: 105987
.. nonce: T7Kzrb
.. section: Library

Fix crash due to improper reference counting in :mod:`asyncio` eager task
factory internal routines.

..

.. date: 2023-06-21-19-04-27
.. gh-issue: 105974
.. nonce: M47n3t
.. section: Library

Fix bug where a :class:`typing.Protocol` class that had one or more
non-callable members would raise :exc:`TypeError` when :func:`issubclass`
was called against it, even if it defined a custom ``__subclasshook__``
method. The behaviour in Python 3.11 and lower -- which has now been
restored -- was not to raise :exc:`TypeError` in these situations if a
custom ``__subclasshook__`` method was defined. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-06-20-23-18-45
.. gh-issue: 96145
.. nonce: o5dTRM
.. section: Library

Reverted addition of ``json.AttrDict``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-19-22-20-41
.. gh-issue: 89812
.. nonce: z2l_e8
.. section: Library

Add :exc:`pathlib.UnsupportedOperation`, which is raised instead of
:exc:`NotImplementedError` when a path operation isn't supported.

..

.. date: 2023-06-19-11-31-55
.. gh-issue: 105808
.. nonce: NL-quu
.. section: Library

Fix a regression introduced in GH-101251 for 3.12, causing
:meth:`gzip.GzipFile.flush` to not flush the compressor (nor pass along the
``zip_mode`` argument).

..

.. date: 2023-06-17-12-13-57
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: KgBH5w
.. section: Library

:func:`~dis.stack_effect` no longer raises an exception if an ``oparg`` is
provided for an ``opcode`` that doesn't use its arg, or when it is not
provided for an ``opcode`` that does use it. In the latter case, the stack
effect is returned for ``oparg=0``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-15-18-11-47
.. gh-issue: 104799
.. nonce: BcLzbP
.. section: Library

Enable :func:`ast.unparse` to unparse function and class definitions created
without the new ``type_params`` field from :pep:`695`. Patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-06-14-18-41-18
.. gh-issue: 105793
.. nonce: YSoykM
.. section: Library

Add *follow_symlinks* keyword-only argument to :meth:`pathlib.Path.is_dir`
and :meth:`~pathlib.Path.is_file`, defaulting to ``True``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-14-14-32-31
.. gh-issue: 105570
.. nonce: sFTtQU
.. section: Library

Deprecate two methods of creating :class:`typing.TypedDict` classes with 0
fields using the functional syntax: ``TD = TypedDict("TD")`` and ``TD =
TypedDict("TD", None)``. Both will be disallowed in Python 3.15. To create a
``TypedDict`` class with 0 fields, either use ``class TD(TypedDict): pass``
or ``TD = TypedDict("TD", {})``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-14-10-27-34
.. gh-issue: 105745
.. nonce: l1ttOQ
.. section: Library

Fix ``webbrowser.Konqueror.open`` method.

..

.. date: 2023-06-13-19-38-12
.. gh-issue: 105733
.. nonce: WOp0mG
.. section: Library

:mod:`ctypes`: Deprecate undocumented :func:`!ctypes.SetPointerType` and
:func:`!ctypes.ARRAY` functions. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-12-15-17-34
.. gh-issue: 105687
.. nonce: ZUonKm
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated ``re.template``, ``re.T``, ``re.TEMPLATE``,
``sre_constans.SRE_FLAG_TEMPLATE``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-12-10-40-38
.. gh-issue: 105684
.. nonce: yiHkFD
.. section: Library

Supporting :meth:`asyncio.Task.set_name` is now mandatory for third party
task implementations. The undocumented :func:`!_set_task_name` function
(deprecated since 3.8) has been removed. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2023-06-11-22-46-06
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: YkhSNt
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :c:func:`!_Unpickler_SetInputStream` where an exception could
end up being overwritten in case of failure.

..

.. date: 2023-06-10-12-20-17
.. gh-issue: 105626
.. nonce: XyZein
.. section: Library

Change the default return value of
:meth:`http.client.HTTPConnection.get_proxy_response_headers` to be ``None``
and not ``{}``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-46-23
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 9KaioS
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`sys` where exceptions could end up being overwritten
because of deferred error handling.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-00-13
.. gh-issue: 105605
.. nonce: YuwqxY
.. section: Library

Harden :mod:`pyexpat` error handling during module initialisation to prevent
exceptions from possibly being overwritten, and objects from being
dereferenced twice.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-52-45
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 6igkhn
.. section: Library

Fix bug in :mod:`decimal` where an exception could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-45-26
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 9rp6tG
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_datetime` where exceptions could be overwritten in case
of module initialisation failure.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-22-16-46
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: EgVJOP
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_ssl` initialisation which could lead to leaked
references and overwritten exceptions.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-46-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: yrJelV
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :class:`array.array` where an exception could end up being
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-40-45
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: _sZilh
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_ctypes` where exceptions could end up being overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-30-59
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: eewafp
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in the :mod:`posix` module where an exception could be
overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-25-14
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 95g1eI
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`!_elementtree` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-11-28
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: 4Mxn7t
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`zoneinfo` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-21-04-39
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: bTcqS9
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`errno` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-20-34-23
.. gh-issue: 105566
.. nonce: YxlGg1
.. section: Library

Deprecate creating a :class:`typing.NamedTuple` class using keyword
arguments to denote the fields (``NT = NamedTuple("NT", x=int, y=str)``).
This will be disallowed in Python 3.15. Use the class-based syntax or the
functional syntax instead.

Two methods of creating ``NamedTuple`` classes with 0 fields using the
functional syntax are also deprecated, and will be disallowed in Python
3.15: ``NT = NamedTuple("NT")`` and ``NT = NamedTuple("NT", None)``. To
create a ``NamedTuple`` class with 0 fields, either use ``class
NT(NamedTuple): pass`` or ``NT = NamedTuple("NT", [])``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-08-38-30
.. gh-issue: 105545
.. nonce: 2q3ysu
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated in 3.11 ``webbrowser.MacOSXOSAScript._name`` attribute.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-17-49-46
.. gh-issue: 105497
.. nonce: K6Q8nU
.. section: Library

Fix flag inversion when alias/mask members exist.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-15-56-45
.. gh-issue: 105509
.. nonce: YIG57j
.. section: Library

:data:`typing.Annotated` is now implemented as an instance of
``typing._SpecialForm`` rather than a class. This should have no user-facing
impact for users of the :mod:`typing` module public API.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-08-58-36
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: bTcqS9
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in :mod:`pickle` where exceptions could be overwritten.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-00-13-00
.. gh-issue: 70303
.. nonce: frwUKH
.. section: Library

Emit :exc:`FutureWarning` from :meth:`pathlib.Path.glob` and
:meth:`~pathlib.Path.rglob` if the given pattern ends with "``**``". In a
future Python release, patterns with this ending will match both files and
directories. Add a trailing slash to only match directories.

..

.. date: 2023-06-07-00-09-52
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: Y_9D4n
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :mod:`sqlite3` where an exception could be overwritten in the
:meth:`collation <sqlite3.Connection.create_collation>` callback.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-16-00-03
.. gh-issue: 105382
.. nonce: A1LgzA
.. section: Library

Remove *cafile*, *capath* and *cadefault* parameters of the
:func:`urllib.request.urlopen` function, deprecated in Python 3.6. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-15-32-44
.. gh-issue: 105376
.. nonce: W4oDQp
.. section: Library

:mod:`logging`: Remove undocumented and untested ``Logger.warn()`` and
``LoggerAdapter.warn()`` methods and ``logging.warn()`` function. Deprecated
since Python 3.3, they were aliases to the :meth:`logging.Logger.warning`
method, :meth:`!logging.LoggerAdapter.warning` method and
:func:`logging.warning` function. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-11-50-33
.. gh-issue: 105332
.. nonce: tmpgRA
.. section: Library

Revert pickling method from by-name back to by-value.

..

.. date: 2023-06-05-14-43-56
.. gh-issue: 104554
.. nonce: pwfKIo
.. section: Library

Add RTSPS scheme support in urllib.parse

..

.. date: 2023-06-04-23-20-56
.. gh-issue: 105292
.. nonce: ns6XQR
.. section: Library

Add option to :func:`traceback.format_exception_only` to recurse into the
nested exception of a :exc:`BaseExceptionGroup`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-04-12-16-47
.. gh-issue: 105280
.. nonce: srRbCe
.. section: Library

Fix bug where ``isinstance([], collections.abc.Mapping)`` could evaluate to
``True`` if garbage collection happened at the wrong time. The bug was
caused by changes to the implementation of :class:`typing.Protocol` in
Python 3.12.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-23-32-17
.. gh-issue: 80480
.. nonce: savBw9
.. section: Library

:mod:`array`: Add ``'w'`` typecode that represents ``Py_UCS4``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-14-57-11
.. gh-issue: 105239
.. nonce: SAmuuj
.. section: Library

Fix longstanding bug where ``issubclass(object, typing.Protocol)`` would
evaluate to ``True`` in some edge cases. Patch by Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-14-23-41
.. gh-issue: 104310
.. nonce: UamCOB
.. section: Library

In the beta 1 release we added a utility function for extension module
authors, to use when testing their module for support in multiple
interpreters or under a per-interpreter GIL.  The name of that function has
changed from ``allowing_all_extensions`` to
``_incompatible_extension_module_restrictions``.  The default for the
"disable_check" argument has change from ``True`` to ``False``, to better
match the new function name.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-02-38-26
.. gh-issue: 105080
.. nonce: 2imGMg
.. section: Library

Fixed inconsistent signature on derived classes for
:func:`inspect.signature`

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-16-58-42
.. gh-issue: 105144
.. nonce: Oqfn0V
.. section: Library

Fix a recent regression in the :mod:`typing` module. The regression meant
that doing ``class Foo(X, typing.Protocol)``, where ``X`` was a class that
had :class:`abc.ABCMeta` as its metaclass, would then cause subsequent
``isinstance(1, X)`` calls to erroneously raise :exc:`TypeError`. Patch by
Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-18-45-02
.. gh-issue: 62948
.. nonce: 1-5wMR
.. section: Library

The :class:`io.IOBase` finalizer now logs the ``close()`` method errors with
:data:`sys.unraisablehook`. Previously, errors were ignored silently by
default, and only logged in :ref:`Python Development Mode <devmode>` or on
:ref:`Python built on debug mode <debug-build>`.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-17-39-03
.. gh-issue: 105096
.. nonce: pw00FW
.. section: Library

:mod:`wave`: Deprecate the ``getmark()``, ``setmark()`` and ``getmarkers()``
methods of the :class:`wave.Wave_read` and :class:`wave.Wave_write` classes.
They will be removed in Python 3.15. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-21-33-24
.. gh-issue: 104992
.. nonce: dbq9WK
.. section: Library

Remove the untested and undocumented :meth:`!unittest.TestProgram.usageExit`
method, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-21-24-06
.. gh-issue: 104996
.. nonce: aaW78g
.. section: Library

Improve performance of :class:`pathlib.PurePath` initialisation by deferring
joining of paths when multiple arguments are given.

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-01-31-30
.. gh-issue: 101588
.. nonce: RaqxFy
.. section: Library

Deprecate undocumented copy/deepcopy/pickle support for itertools.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-23-34-54
.. gh-issue: 103631
.. nonce: x5Urye
.. section: Library

Fix ``pathlib.PurePosixPath(pathlib.PureWindowsPath(...))`` not converting
path separators to restore 3.11 compatible behavior.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-22-54-20
.. gh-issue: 104947
.. nonce: hi6TUr
.. section: Library

Make comparisons between :class:`pathlib.PureWindowsPath` objects consistent
across Windows and Posix to match 3.11 behavior.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-17-25-16
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: O6TOMc
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!audioop` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-16-50-43
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: pmg0Fr
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!aifc` module, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-15-54-02
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: nW-5MI
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!uu` module, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-08-50-47
.. gh-issue: 104935
.. nonce: -rm1BR
.. section: Library

Fix bugs with the interaction between :func:`typing.runtime_checkable` and
:class:`typing.Generic` that were introduced by the :pep:`695`
implementation. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-00-53-08
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: Iyjtt0
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!crypt` module and its private :mod:`!_crypt`
extension, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-23-40-22
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: FHA99J
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!nis` module, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-22-50-21
.. gh-issue: 104898
.. nonce: UbT2S4
.. section: Library

Add missing :attr:`~object.__slots__` to :class:`os.PathLike`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-22-47-13
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: itOIf3
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!xdrlib` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-22-22-03
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: NwpjhZ
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!nntplib` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-21-30-40
.. gh-issue: 104886
.. nonce: 8TuV-_
.. section: Library

Remove the undocumented :class:`!configparser.LegacyInterpolation` class,
deprecated in the docstring since Python 3.2, and with a deprecation warning
since Python 3.11. Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-20-21-27
.. gh-issue: 104786
.. nonce: SmgT5_
.. section: Library

Remove kwargs-based :class:`typing.TypedDict` creation

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-19-48-16
.. gh-issue: 104876
.. nonce: Z00Qnk
.. section: Library

Remove the :meth:`!turtle.RawTurtle.settiltangle` method, deprecated in docs
since Python 3.1 and with a deprecation warning since Python 3.11. Patch by
Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-18-48-10
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: TrgUeO
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Removed the :mod:`!msilib` package, deprecated in Python 3.11.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-17-47-25
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: TzUSY2
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!spwd` module, deprecated in Python 3.11: the
:pypi:`python-pam` project can be used instead. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-17-22-56
.. gh-issue: 75552
.. nonce: _QlrpQ
.. section: Library

Removed the ``tkinter.tix`` module, deprecated since Python 3.6.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-15-57-34
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: IHWRgg
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!chunk` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-15-17-05
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: EmFIQ5
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!mailcap` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-14-58-13
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: sQaXrY
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!sunau` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-14-30-14
.. gh-issue: 104780
.. nonce: nXGIJt
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!ossaudiodev` module, deprecated in Python
3.11. Patch Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-11-45-22
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: R0Br4-
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!pipes` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-09-55-33
.. gh-issue: 104873
.. nonce: BKQ54y
.. section: Library

Add :func:`typing.get_protocol_members` to return the set of members
defining a :class:`typing.Protocol`.  Add :func:`typing.is_protocol` to
check whether a class is a :class:`typing.Protocol`. Patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-09-34-23
.. gh-issue: 104874
.. nonce: oqyJSy
.. section: Library

Document the ``__name__`` and ``__supertype__`` attributes of
:class:`typing.NewType`. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-08-45-04
.. gh-issue: 104835
.. nonce: bN_B-B
.. section: Library

Removed the following :mod:`unittest` functions, deprecated in Python 3.11:

* :func:`!unittest.findTestCases`
* :func:`!unittest.makeSuite`
* :func:`!unittest.getTestCaseNames`

Use :class:`~unittest.TestLoader` methods instead:

* :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.loadTestsFromModule`
* :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.loadTestsFromTestCase`
* :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.getTestCaseNames`

Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-21-25-54
.. gh-issue: 104804
.. nonce: 78fiE6
.. section: Library

Remove the untested and undocumented :mod:`webbrowser` :class:`!MacOSX`
class, deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-19-53-18
.. gh-issue: 83863
.. nonce: eRI5JG
.. section: Library

Support for using :class:`pathlib.Path` objects as context managers has been
removed. Before Python 3.9, exiting the context manager marked a path as
"closed", which caused some (but not all!) methods to raise when called.
Since Python 3.9, using a path as a context manager does nothing.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-18-31-49
.. gh-issue: 104799
.. nonce: MJYOw6
.. section: Library

Adjust the location of the (see :pep:`695`) ``type_params`` field on
:class:`ast.ClassDef`, :class:`ast.AsyncFunctionDef`, and
:class:`ast.FunctionDef` to better preserve backward compatibility. Patch by
Jelle Zijlstra

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-17-43-52
.. gh-issue: 104797
.. nonce: NR7KzF
.. section: Library

Allow :class:`typing.Protocol` classes to inherit from
:class:`collections.abc.Buffer`. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-04-01-27
.. gh-issue: 104783
.. nonce: QyhIoq
.. section: Library

Remove ``locale.resetlocale()`` function deprecated in Python 3.11. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-03-36-47
.. gh-issue: 104780
.. nonce: P4e3Yf
.. section: Library

Remove the ``2to3`` program and the :mod:`!lib2to3` module, deprecated in
Python 3.11. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-02-20-13
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: 7K59zr
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!telnetlib` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-02-13-11
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: JNiEjv
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!imghdr` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-01-47-57
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: I6MQhb
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!cgi` and :mod:`!cgitb` modules, deprecated in
Python 3.11. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-01-37-40
.. gh-issue: 104773
.. nonce: 8c-GsG
.. section: Library

:pep:`594`: Remove the :mod:`!sndhdr` module, deprecated in Python 3.11.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-22-18-39-53
.. gh-issue: 104372
.. nonce: 7tDRaK
.. section: Library

On Linux where :mod:`subprocess` can use the ``vfork()`` syscall for faster
spawning, prevent the parent process from blocking other threads by dropping
the GIL while it waits for the vfork'ed child process ``exec()`` outcome.
This prevents spawning a binary from a slow filesystem from blocking the
rest of the application.

..

.. date: 2023-05-19-19-46-22
.. gh-issue: 99108
.. nonce: wqCg0t
.. section: Library

We now release the GIL around built-in :mod:`hashlib` computations of
reasonable size for the SHA families and MD5 hash functions, matching what
our OpenSSL backed hash computations already does.

..

.. date: 2023-05-15-18-57-42
.. gh-issue: 102613
.. nonce: YD9yx-
.. section: Library

Improve performance of :meth:`pathlib.Path.glob` when expanding a pattern
with a non-terminal "``**``" component by filtering walked paths through a
regular expression, rather than calling :func:`os.scandir` more than once on
each directory.

..

.. date: 2023-05-11-23-03-00
.. gh-issue: 104399
.. nonce: MMatTP
.. section: Library

Prepare the ``_tkinter`` module for building with Tcl 9.0 and future
libtommath by replacing usage of deprecated functions
:c:func:`mp_to_unsigned_bin_n` and :c:func:`mp_unsigned_bin_size` when
necessary.

..

.. date: 2023-04-28-09-31-21
.. gh-issue: 102676
.. nonce: J8qDRa
.. section: Library

Add fields ``start_offset``, ``cache_offset``, ``end_offset``,
``baseopname``, ``baseopcode``, ``jump_target`` and ``oparg`` to
:class:`dis.Instruction`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-15-23-26-16
.. gh-issue: 103558
.. nonce: w9OzK4
.. section: Library

Fixed ``parent`` argument validation mechanism of :mod:`argparse`. Improved
test coverage.

..

.. date: 2023-04-12-03-03-27
.. gh-issue: 103464
.. nonce: Oa_8IW
.. section: Library

Provide helpful usage messages when parsing incorrect :mod:`pdb` commands.

..

.. date: 2023-04-09-05-30-41
.. gh-issue: 103384
.. nonce: zAV7iB
.. section: Library

Generalize the regex pattern ``BaseConfigurator.INDEX_PATTERN`` to allow
spaces and non-alphanumeric characters in keys.

..

.. date: 2023-04-09-03-53-02
.. gh-issue: 103124
.. nonce: JspiNN
.. section: Library

Added multiline statement support for :mod:`pdb`

..

.. date: 2023-04-08-12-43-52
.. gh-issue: 101162
.. nonce: yOCd_J
.. section: Library

Forbid using :func:`builtins.issubclass` with :class:`types.GenericAlias` as
the first argument.

..

.. date: 2023-04-03-08-09-40
.. gh-issue: 103200
.. nonce: lq1Etz
.. section: Library

Fix cache repopulation semantics of zipimport.invalidate_caches(). The cache
is now repopulated upon retrieving files with an invalid cache, not when the
cache is invalidated.

..

.. date: 2023-03-14-01-19-57
.. gh-issue: 100061
.. nonce: CiXJYn
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that causes wrong matches for regular expressions with possessive
qualifier.

..

.. date: 2023-03-12-03-37-03
.. gh-issue: 77609
.. nonce: aOQttm
.. section: Library

Add *follow_symlinks* argument to :meth:`pathlib.Path.glob` and
:meth:`~pathlib.Path.rglob`, defaulting to false.

..

.. date: 2023-03-12-01-17-15
.. gh-issue: 102541
.. nonce: LK1adc
.. section: Library

Hide traceback in :func:`help` prompt, when import failed.

..

.. date: 2023-03-08-19-30-53
.. gh-issue: 102120
.. nonce: xkQ5Wr
.. section: Library

Added a stream mode to ``tarfile`` that allows for reading archives without
caching info about the inner files.

..

.. date: 2023-02-20-15-41-59
.. gh-issue: 102029
.. nonce: 9ZPG99
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing any arguments to :func:`threading.RLock`.

..

.. date: 2023-02-20-12-00-11
.. gh-issue: 88233
.. nonce: o5Zb0t
.. section: Library

Refactored ``zipfile._strip_extra`` to use higher level abstractions for
extras instead of a heavy-state loop.

..

.. date: 2023-02-18-22-55-48
.. gh-issue: 102024
.. nonce: RUmg_D
.. section: Library

Reduce calls of ``_idle_semaphore.release()`` in
:func:`concurrent.futures.thread._worker`.

..

.. date: 2023-02-17-18-56-46
.. gh-issue: 73435
.. nonce: 7sTJHk
.. section: Library

Add support for recursive wildcards in :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.match`.

..

.. date: 2022-12-24-12-50-54
.. gh-issue: 84867
.. nonce: OhaLbU
.. section: Library

:class:`unittest.TestLoader` no longer loads test cases from exact
:class:`unittest.TestCase` and :class:`unittest.FunctionTestCase` classes.

..

.. date: 2022-11-26-22-05-22
.. gh-issue: 99203
.. nonce: j0DUae
.. section: Library

Restore following CPython <= 3.10.5 behavior of :func:`shutil.make_archive`:
do not create an empty archive if ``root_dir`` is not a directory, and, in
that case, raise :class:`FileNotFoundError` or :class:`NotADirectoryError`
regardless of ``format`` choice. Beyond the brought-back behavior, the
function may now also raise these exceptions in ``dry_run`` mode.

..

.. date: 2022-08-07-11-10-26
.. gh-issue: 80480
.. nonce: IFccj3
.. section: Library

Emit :exc:`DeprecationWarning` for :mod:`array`'s ``'u'`` type code,
deprecated in docs since Python 3.3.

..

.. date: 2022-07-18-14-20-56
.. gh-issue: 94924
.. nonce: X0buz2
.. section: Library

:func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec` now properly returns coroutine
functions compatible with :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction`

..

.. date: 2022-07-12-18-45-13
.. gh-issue: 94777
.. nonce: mOybx7
.. section: Library

Fix hanging :mod:`multiprocessing` ``ProcessPoolExecutor`` when a child
process crashes while data is being written in the call queue.

..

.. date: 2022-05-17-10-46-44
.. gh-issue: 92871
.. nonce: GVogrT
.. section: Library

Remove the ``typing.io`` and ``typing.re`` namespaces, deprecated since
Python 3.8. All items are still available from the main :mod:`typing`
module.

..

.. bpo: 43633
.. date: 2021-10-31-16-06-28
.. nonce: vflwXv
.. section: Library

Improve the textual representation of IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses
(:rfc:`4291` Sections 2.2, 2.5.5.2) in :mod:`ipaddress`. Patch by Oleksandr
Pavliuk.

..

.. bpo: 44850
.. date: 2021-08-16-17-52-26
.. nonce: r8jx5u
.. section: Library

Improve performance of :func:`operator.methodcaller` using the :pep:`590`
``vectorcall`` convention. Patch by Anthony Lee and Pieter Eendebak.

..

.. bpo: 44185
.. date: 2021-06-24-20-45-03
.. nonce: ZHb8yJ
.. section: Library

:func:`unittest.mock.mock_open` will call the :func:`close` method of the
file handle mock when it is exiting from the context manager. Patch by Samet
Yaslan.

..

.. bpo: 40988
.. date: 2020-11-10-07-04-15
.. nonce: 5kBC-O
.. section: Library

Improve performance of :class:`functools.singledispatchmethod` by caching
the generated dispatch wrapper. Optimization suggested by frederico. Patch
by @mental32, Alex Waygood and Pieter Eendebak.

..

.. bpo: 41768
.. date: 2020-09-16-16-53-06
.. nonce: 8_fWkC
.. section: Library

:mod:`unittest.mock` speccing no longer calls class properties. Patch by
Melanie Witt.

..

.. bpo: 18319
.. date: 2020-05-03-00-33-15
.. nonce: faPTlx
.. section: Library

Ensure ``gettext(msg)`` retrieve translations even if a plural form exists.
In other words: ``gettext(msg) == ngettext(msg, '', 1)``.

..

.. bpo: 17013
.. date: 2019-09-13-13-28-10
.. nonce: NWcgE3
.. section: Library

Add ``ThreadingMock`` to :mod:`unittest.mock` that can be used to create
Mock objects that can wait until they are called. Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan and Mario Corchero.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-02-39-06
.. gh-issue: 109209
.. nonce: 0LBewo
.. section: Documentation

The minimum Sphinx version required for the documentation is now 4.2.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-13-43-49
.. gh-issue: 108826
.. nonce: KG7abS
.. section: Documentation

:mod:`dis` module command-line interface is now mentioned in documentation.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-16-33-04
.. gh-issue: 107305
.. nonce: qB2LS4
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation for :c:type:`PyInterpreterConfig` and
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig`.  Also clarify some of the nearby docs
relative to per-interpreter GIL.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-15-14-13
.. gh-issue: 107008
.. nonce: 3JQ1Vt
.. section: Documentation

Document the :mod:`curses` module variables :const:`~curses.LINES` and
:const:`~curses.COLS`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-11-51-57
.. gh-issue: 106948
.. nonce: K_JQ7j
.. section: Documentation

Add a number of standard external names to ``nitpick_ignore``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-19-28-59
.. gh-issue: 106232
.. nonce: hQ4-tz
.. section: Documentation

Make timeit doc command lines compatible with Windows by using double quotes
for arguments.  This works on linux and macOS also.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-23-05-51
.. gh-issue: 105172
.. nonce: SVfvkD
.. section: Documentation

Fixed :func:`functools.lru_cache` docstring accounting for ``typed``
argument's different handling of str and int. Patch by Bar Harel.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-14-10-24
.. gh-issue: 105052
.. nonce: MGFwbm
.. section: Documentation

Update ``timeit`` doc to specify that time in seconds is just the default.

..

.. date: 2023-05-28-21-01-00
.. gh-issue: 89455
.. nonce: qAKRrA
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for the ``max_group_depth`` and
``max_group_width`` parameters and the ``exceptions`` attribute of the
:class:`traceback.TracebackException` class.

..

.. date: 2023-05-28-19-08-42
.. gh-issue: 89412
.. nonce: j4cg7K
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for the ``end_lineno`` and ``end_offset``
attributes of the :class:`traceback.TracebackException` class.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-22-34-31
.. gh-issue: 104943
.. nonce: J2v1Pc
.. section: Documentation

Remove mentions of old Python versions in :class:`typing.NamedTuple`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-16-22-08-24
.. gh-issue: 54738
.. nonce: mJvCnj
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation on how to localize the :mod:`argparse` module.

..

.. date: 2023-03-19-09-39-31
.. gh-issue: 102823
.. nonce: OzsOz0
.. section: Documentation

Document the return type of ``x // y`` when ``x`` and ``y`` have type
:class:`float`.

..

.. date: 2023-03-16-15-39-26
.. gh-issue: 102759
.. nonce: ehpHw6
.. section: Documentation

Align function signature for ``functools.reduce`` in documentation and
docstring with the C implementation.

..

.. date: 2023-10-10-23-20-13
.. gh-issue: 110647
.. nonce: jKG3sY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_stress_modifying_handlers() of test_signal. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-02-32-18
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: VfxBLI
.. section: Tests

Fix test_tools.test_freeze on FreeBSD: run "make distclean" instead of "make
clean" in the copied source directory to remove also the "python" program.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-19-33-49
.. gh-issue: 110167
.. nonce: mIdj3v
.. section: Tests

Fix a deadlock in test_socket when server fails with a timeout but the
client is still running in its thread. Don't hold a lock to call cleanup
functions in doCleanups(). One of the cleanup function waits until the
client completes, whereas the client could deadlock if it called
addCleanup() in such situation. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-14-22-48
.. gh-issue: 110388
.. nonce: 1-HQJO
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :mod:`tty`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-13-46-50
.. gh-issue: 81002
.. nonce: bOcuV6
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :mod:`termios`.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-18-27-47
.. gh-issue: 110367
.. nonce: Nnq1I7
.. section: Tests

regrtest: When using worker processes (-jN) with --verbose3 option, regrtest
can now display the worker output even if a worker process does crash.
Previously, sys.stdout and sys.stderr were replaced and so the worker output
was lost on a crash. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-10-54-09
.. gh-issue: 110267
.. nonce: O-c47G
.. section: Tests

Add tests for pickling and copying PyStructSequence objects. Patched by
Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2023-10-01-10-27-02
.. gh-issue: 110171
.. nonce: ZPlo0h
.. section: Tests

``libregrtest`` now always sets and shows ``random.seed``, so tests are more
reproducible. Use ``--randseed`` flag to pass the explicit random seed for
tests.

..

.. date: 2023-09-30-20-18-38
.. gh-issue: 110152
.. nonce: 4Kxve1
.. section: Tests

Remove ``Tools/scripts/run_tests.py`` and ``make hostrunnertest``. Just run
``./python -m test --slow-ci``, ``make buildbottest`` or ``make test``
instead. Python test runner (regrtest) now handles cross-compilation and
HOSTRUNNER. It also adds options to Python such fast ``-u -E -W default
-bb`` when ``--fast-ci`` or ``--slow-ci`` option is used. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-14-11-30
.. gh-issue: 110031
.. nonce: fQnFnc
.. section: Tests

Skip test_threading tests using thread+fork if Python is built with Address
Sanitizer (ASAN). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-12-48-42
.. gh-issue: 110088
.. nonce: qUhRga
.. section: Tests

Fix test_asyncio timeouts: don't measure the maximum duration, a test should
not measure a CI performance. Only measure the minimum duration when a task
has a timeout or delay. Add ``CLOCK_RES`` to ``test_asyncio.utils``. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-00-19-21
.. gh-issue: 109974
.. nonce: Sh_g-r
.. section: Tests

Fix race conditions in test_threading lock tests. Wait until a condition is
met rather than using :func:`time.sleep` with a hardcoded number of seconds.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-18-14-52
.. gh-issue: 110033
.. nonce: 2yHMx0
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_interprocess_signal()`` of ``test_signal``. Make sure that the
``subprocess.Popen`` object is deleted before the test raising an exception
in a signal handler. Otherwise, ``Popen.__del__()`` can get the exception
which is logged as ``Exception ignored in: ...`` and the test fails. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-14-47-14
.. gh-issue: 109594
.. nonce: DB5KPP
.. section: Tests

Fix test_timeout() of test_concurrent_futures.test_wait. Remove the future
which may or may not complete depending if it takes longer than the timeout
or not. Keep the second future which does not complete before wait()
timeout. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-12-25-19
.. gh-issue: 109972
.. nonce: GYnwIP
.. section: Tests

Split test_gdb.py file into a test_gdb package made of multiple tests, so
tests can now be run in parallel. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-18-12-01
.. gh-issue: 109566
.. nonce: CP0Vhf
.. section: Tests

regrtest: When ``--fast-ci`` or ``--slow-ci`` option is used, regrtest now
replaces the current process with a new process to add ``-u -W default -bb
-E`` options to Python. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-00-49-18
.. gh-issue: 109748
.. nonce: nxlT1i
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_zippath_from_non_installed_posix()`` of test_venv: don't copy
``__pycache__/`` sub-directories, because they can be modified by other
Python tests running in parallel. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-23-59-37
.. gh-issue: 109739
.. nonce: MUn7K5
.. section: Tests

regrtest: Fix reference leak check on Windows. Disable the load tracker on
Windows in the reference leak check mode (-R option). Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-25-14-41-18
.. gh-issue: 109276
.. nonce: uC_cWo
.. section: Tests

regrtest: When a test fails with "env changed" and the --rerun option is
used, the test is now re-run in verbose mode in a fresh process. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-20-02-32-17
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: AoUJuK
.. section: Tests

Skip test_freeze_simple_script() of test_tools.test_freeze if Python is
built with ``./configure --enable-optimizations``, which means with Profile
Guided Optimization (PGO): it just makes the test too slow. The freeze tool
is tested by many other CIs with other (faster) compiler flags. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-19-08-22
.. gh-issue: 109580
.. nonce: G02Zam
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_perf_profiler`` if Python is built with ASAN, MSAN or UBSAN
sanitizer. Python does crash randomly in this test on such build. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-13-33-20
.. gh-issue: 109566
.. nonce: aX0g9o
.. section: Tests

regrtest: Add ``--fast-ci`` and ``--slow-ci`` options. ``--fast-ci`` uses a
default timeout of 10 minutes and ``-u all,-cpu`` (skip slowest tests).
``--slow-ci`` uses a default timeout of 20 minutes and ``-u all`` (run all
tests). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-14-23-27-40
.. gh-issue: 109425
.. nonce: j-uFep
.. section: Tests

libregrtest now decodes stdout of test worker processes with the
"backslashreplace" error handler to log corrupted stdout, instead of failing
with an error and not logging the stdout. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-14-22-58-47
.. gh-issue: 109396
.. nonce: J1a4jR
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_socket.test_hmac_sha1()`` in FIPS mode. Use a longer key: FIPS
mode requires at least of at least 112 bits. The previous key was only 32
bits. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-13-05-58-09
.. gh-issue: 104736
.. nonce: lA25Fu
.. section: Tests

Fix test_gdb on Python built with LLVM clang 16 on Linux ppc64le (ex: Fedora
38). Search patterns in gdb "bt" command output to detect when gdb fails to
retrieve the traceback. For example, skip a test if ``Backtrace stopped:
frame did not save the PC`` is found. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-19-11-57
.. gh-issue: 109276
.. nonce: qxI4OG
.. section: Tests

libregrtest now calls :func:`random.seed` before running each test file
when ``-r/--randomize`` command line option is used. Moreover, it's also
called in worker processes.  It should help to make tests more
deterministic. Previously, it was only called once in the main process
before running all test files and it was not called in worker processes.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-11-18-19-52
.. gh-issue: 109276
.. nonce: btfFtT
.. section: Tests

libregrtest now uses a separated file descriptor to write test result as
JSON. Previously, if a test wrote debug messages late around the JSON, the
main test process failed to parse JSON. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-23-05-50
.. gh-issue: 108996
.. nonce: tJBru6
.. section: Tests

Fix and enable ``test_msvcrt``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-22-32-20
.. gh-issue: 109237
.. nonce: SvgKwD
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_site.test_underpth_basic()`` when the working directory contains
at least one non-ASCII character: encode the ``._pth`` file to UTF-8 and
enable the UTF-8 Mode to use UTF-8 for the child process stdout. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-10-19-59-57
.. gh-issue: 109230
.. nonce: SRNLFQ
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_pyexpat.test_exception()``: it can now be run from a directory
different than Python source code directory. Before, the test failed in this
case.  Skip the test if Modules/pyexpat.c source is not available. Skip also
the test on Python implementations other than CPython. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-22-06-22
.. gh-issue: 108996
.. nonce: IBhR3U
.. section: Tests

Add tests for ``msvcrt``.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-18-27-53
.. gh-issue: 109015
.. nonce: 1dS1AQ
.. section: Tests

Fix test_asyncio, test_imaplib and test_socket tests on FreeBSD if the TCP
blackhole is enabled (``sysctl net.inet.tcp.blackhole``). Skip the few tests
which failed with ``ETIMEDOUT`` which such non standard configuration.
Currently, the `FreeBSD GCP image enables TCP and UDP blackhole
<https://reviews.freebsd.org/D41751>`_ (``sysctl net.inet.tcp.blackhole=2``
and ``sysctl net.inet.udp.blackhole=1``).  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-15-36-51
.. gh-issue: 91960
.. nonce: P3nD5v
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_gdb`` if gdb is unable to retrieve Python frame objects: if a
frame is ``<optimized out>``. When Python is built with "clang -Og", gdb can
fail to retrieve the *frame* parameter of ``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault()``. In
this case, tests like ``py_bt()`` are likely to fail. Without getting access
to Python frames, ``python-gdb.py`` is mostly clueless on retrieving the
Python traceback. Moreover, ``test_gdb`` is no longer skipped on macOS if
Python is built with Clang. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-23-00-09
.. gh-issue: 108962
.. nonce: R4NwuU
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_tempfile.test_flags()`` if ``chflags()`` fails with "OSError:
[Errno 45] Operation not supported" (ex: on FreeBSD 13). Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-05-21-42-54
.. gh-issue: 91960
.. nonce: abClTs
.. section: Tests

FreeBSD 13.2 CI coverage for pull requests is now provided by Cirrus-CI (a
hosted CI service that supports Linux, macOS, Windows, and FreeBSD).

..

.. date: 2023-09-04-15-18-14
.. gh-issue: 89392
.. nonce: 8A4T5p
.. section: Tests

Removed support of ``test_main()`` function in tests. They now always use
normal unittest test runner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-21-41-10
.. gh-issue: 108851
.. nonce: xFTYOE
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_tomllib`` recursion tests for WASI buildbots: reduce the
recursion limit and compute the maximum nested array/dict depending on the
current available recursion limit. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-21-18-35
.. gh-issue: 108851
.. nonce: CCuHyI
.. section: Tests

Add ``get_recursion_available()`` and ``get_recursion_depth()`` functions to
the :mod:`test.support` module. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-20-15-49
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: Osvmhf
.. section: Tests

Add ``--fail-rerun option`` option to regrtest: if a test failed when then
passed when rerun in verbose mode, exit the process with exit code 2
(error), instead of exit code 0 (success). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-06-17-12
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: fjV-CJ
.. section: Tests

Rename regrtest ``--verbose2`` option (``-w``) to ``--rerun``. Keep
``--verbose2`` as a deprecated alias. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-03-02-01-55
.. gh-issue: 108834
.. nonce: iAwXzj
.. section: Tests

When regrtest reruns failed tests in verbose mode (``./python -m test
--rerun``), tests are now rerun in fresh worker processes rather than being
executed in the main process. If a test does crash or is killed by a
timeout, the main process can detect and handle the killed worker process.
Tests are rerun in parallel if the ``-jN`` option is used to run tests in
parallel. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-19-06-52
.. gh-issue: 108822
.. nonce: arTbBI
.. section: Tests

``regrtest`` now computes statistics on all tests: successes, failures and
skipped. ``test_netrc``, ``test_pep646_syntax`` and ``test_xml_etree`` now
return results in their ``test_main()`` function. Patch by Victor Stinner
and Alex Waygood.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-05-13-38
.. gh-issue: 108794
.. nonce: tGHXBt
.. section: Tests

The :meth:`doctest.DocTestRunner.run` method now counts the number of
skipped tests. Add :attr:`doctest.DocTestRunner.skips` and
:attr:`doctest.TestResults.skipped` attributes. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-06-10-36
.. gh-issue: 108388
.. nonce: YCVB0D
.. section: Tests

Convert test_concurrent_futures to a package of 7 sub-tests. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-04-23-35
.. gh-issue: 108388
.. nonce: mr0MeE
.. section: Tests

Split test_multiprocessing_fork, test_multiprocessing_forkserver and
test_multiprocessing_spawn into test packages. Each package is made of 4
sub-tests: processes, threads, manager and misc. It allows running more
tests in parallel and so reduce the total test duration. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-23-04-08-18
.. gh-issue: 105776
.. nonce: oE6wp_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_cppext when the C compiler command ``-std=c11`` option: remove
``-std=`` options from the compiler command. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-05-14-01-07
.. gh-issue: 107652
.. nonce: 5OxOlT
.. section: Tests

Set up CIFuzz to run fuzz targets in GitHub Actions. Patch by Illia
Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-14-36-33
.. gh-issue: 107237
.. nonce: y1pY79
.. section: Tests

``test_logging``: Fix ``test_udp_reconnection()`` by increasing the timeout
from 100 ms to 5 minutes (LONG_TIMEOUT). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-24-16-56-59
.. gh-issue: 107178
.. nonce: Gq1usE
.. section: Tests

Add the C API test for functions in the Mapping Protocol, the Sequence
Protocol and some functions in the Object Protocol.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-13-49-40
.. gh-issue: 106714
.. nonce: btYI5S
.. section: Tests

test_capi: Fix test_no_FatalError_infinite_loop() to no longer write a
coredump, by using test.support.SuppressCrashReport. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-16-02-57-08
.. gh-issue: 104090
.. nonce: cKtK7g
.. section: Tests

Avoid creating a reference to the test object in
:meth:`~unittest.TestResult.collectedDurations`.

..

.. date: 2023-07-14-16-20-06
.. gh-issue: 106752
.. nonce: gd1i6D
.. section: Tests

Moved tests for ``zipfile.Path`` into ``Lib/test/test_zipfile/_path``. Made
``zipfile._path`` a package.

..

.. date: 2023-07-12-14-07-07
.. gh-issue: 106690
.. nonce: NDz-oG
.. section: Tests

Add .coveragerc to cpython repository for use with coverage package.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-02-51-08
.. gh-issue: 101634
.. nonce: Rayczr
.. section: Tests

When running the Python test suite with ``-jN`` option, if a worker stdout
cannot be decoded from the locale encoding report a failed testn so the
exitcode is non-zero. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-14-49-46
.. gh-issue: 105084
.. nonce: lvVvoj
.. section: Tests

When the Python build is configured ``--with-wheel-pkg-dir``, tests
requiring the ``setuptools`` and ``wheel`` wheels will search for the wheels
in ``WHEEL_PKG_DIR``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-19-08-06-06
.. gh-issue: 81005
.. nonce: -q7m9W
.. section: Tests

String tests are modified to reflect that ``str`` and ``unicode`` are merged
in Python 3. Patch by Daniel Fortunov.

..

.. date: 2023-04-05-06-45-20
.. gh-issue: 103186
.. nonce: 640Eg-
.. section: Tests

Suppress and assert expected RuntimeWarnings in test_sys_settrace.py

..

.. date: 2022-06-09-21-27-38
.. gh-issue: 69714
.. nonce: 49tyHW
.. section: Tests

Add additional tests to :mod:`calendar` to achieve full test coverage.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-02-15-23
.. gh-issue: 103053
.. nonce: --7JUF
.. section: Build

"make check-clean-src" now also checks if the "python" program is found in
the source directory: fail with an error if it does exist. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-11-46-20
.. gh-issue: 109191
.. nonce: imUkVN
.. section: Build

Fix compile error when building with recent versions of libedit.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-17-55-09
.. gh-issue: 110276
.. nonce: luaKRg
.. section: Build

No longer ignore :envvar:`PROFILE_TASK` failure silently: command used by
Profile Guided Optimization (PGO). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-29-21-01-48
.. gh-issue: 109566
.. nonce: _enldb
.. section: Build

Remove ``make testall`` target: use ``make buildbottest`` instead. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-26-16-00-50
.. gh-issue: 109740
.. nonce: wboWdQ
.. section: Build

The experimental ``--disable-gil`` configure flag now includes "t" (for
"threaded") in extension ABI tags.

..

.. date: 2023-09-07-19-58-05
.. gh-issue: 109054
.. nonce: 5r3S3l
.. section: Build

Fix building the ``_testcapi`` extension on Linux AArch64 which requires
linking to libatomic when ``<cpython/pyatomic.h>`` is used: the
``_Py_atomic_or_uint64()`` function requires libatomic
``__atomic_fetch_or_8()`` on this platform. The configure script now checks
if linking to libatomic is needed and generates a new LIBATOMIC variable
used to build the _testcapi extension. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-18-04-15
.. gh-issue: 63760
.. nonce: r8hJ6q
.. section: Build

Fix Solaris build: no longer redefine the ``gethostname()`` function.
Solaris defines the function since 2005. Patch by Victor Stinner, original
patch by Jakub Kulík.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-01-39-26
.. gh-issue: 108740
.. nonce: JHExAQ
.. section: Build

Fix a race condition in ``make regen-all``. The ``deepfreeze.c`` source and
files generated by Argument Clinic are now generated or updated before
generating "global objects". Previously, some identifiers may miss depending
on the order in which these files were generated. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-02-52-52
.. gh-issue: 108634
.. nonce: 3dpBvf
.. section: Build

Python built with :file:`configure` :option:`--with-trace-refs` (tracing
references) is now ABI compatible with Python release build and :ref:`debug
build <debug-build>`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-29-15-05-09
.. gh-issue: 85283
.. nonce: tlK7G7
.. section: Build

The ``_stat`` C extension is now built with the :ref:`limited C API
<limited-c-api>`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-18-36-31
.. gh-issue: 108447
.. nonce: Ofsygr
.. section: Build

Fix x86_64 GNU/Hurd build

..

.. date: 2023-08-09-17-05-33
.. gh-issue: 107814
.. nonce: c0Oapq
.. section: Build

When calling ``find_python.bat`` with ``-q`` it did not properly silence the
output of nuget. That is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2023-08-01-17-12-53
.. gh-issue: 105481
.. nonce: 42nsDE
.. section: Build

Remove the make target ``regen-opcode-targets``, merge its work into
``regen-opcode`` which repeats most of the calculation. This simplifies the
code for the build and reduces code duplication.

..

.. date: 2023-07-28-18-17-33
.. gh-issue: 106881
.. nonce: U3Ezdq
.. section: Build

Check for ``linux/limits.h`` before including it in
``Modules/posixmodule.c``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-02-30-00
.. gh-issue: 95855
.. nonce: wA7rAf
.. section: Build

Refactor platform triplet detection code and add detection for MIPS soft
float and musl libc.

..

.. date: 2023-07-23-00-38-51
.. gh-issue: 106962
.. nonce: VVYrWB
.. section: Build

Detect MPI compilers in :file:`configure`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-26-21-56-29
.. gh-issue: 106118
.. nonce: 0cCfhl
.. section: Build

Fix compilation for platforms without :data:`!O_CLOEXEC`. The issue was
introduced with Python 3.12b1 in :gh:`103295`. Patch by Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-06-16-23-40-49
.. gh-issue: 105875
.. nonce: naj8v5
.. section: Build

SQLite 3.15.2 or newer is required to build the :mod:`sqlite3` extension
module. Patch by Erlend Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-09-08-10
.. gh-issue: 90005
.. nonce: 8mmeJQ
.. section: Build

Fix a regression in :file:`configure` where we could end up unintentionally
linking with ``libbsd``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-02-19-12-45
.. gh-issue: 102404
.. nonce: Ry9piA
.. section: Build

Document how to perform a WASI build on Linux. Also add
Tools/wasm/build_wasi.sh as a reference implementation of the docs.

..

.. date: 2023-05-26-15-44-20
.. gh-issue: 89886
.. nonce: _iSW-p
.. section: Build

Autoconf 2.71 and aclocal 1.16.4 is now required to regenerate
:file:`configure`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-20-23-49-30
.. gh-issue: 104692
.. nonce: s5UIu5
.. section: Build

Include ``commoninstall`` as a prerequisite for ``bininstall``

This ensures that ``commoninstall`` is completed before ``bininstall`` is
started when parallel builds are used (``make -j install``), and so the
``python3`` symlink is only installed after all standard library modules are
installed.

..

.. date: 2023-02-03-21-36-42
.. gh-issue: 101538
.. nonce: sF5F6S
.. section: Build

Add experimental wasi-threads support. Patch by Takashi Yamamoto.

..

.. date: 2023-10-06-14-20-14
.. gh-issue: 110437
.. nonce: xpYy9q
.. section: Windows

Allows overriding the source of VC redistributables so that releases can be
guaranteed to never downgrade between updates.

..

.. date: 2023-10-05-15-23-23
.. gh-issue: 109286
.. nonce: N8OzMg
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to use SQLite 3.43.1.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-12-30-59
.. gh-issue: 82367
.. nonce: nxwfMx
.. section: Windows

:func:`os.path.realpath` now resolves MS-DOS style file names even if the
file is not accessible. Patch by Moonsik Park.

..

.. date: 2023-09-28-17-09-23
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: CIMftz
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.11.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-00-36-57
.. gh-issue: 106242
.. nonce: q24ITw
.. section: Windows

Fixes :func:`~os.path.realpath` to behave consistently when passed a path
containing an embedded null character on Windows. In strict mode, it now
raises :exc:`OSError` instead of the unexpected :exc:`ValueError`, and in
non-strict mode will make the path absolute.

..

.. date: 2023-08-18-00-01-21
.. gh-issue: 83180
.. nonce: DdLffv
.. section: Windows

Changes the :ref:`launcher` to prefer an active virtual environment when the
launched script has a shebang line using a Unix-like virtual command, even
if the command requests a specific version of Python.

..

.. date: 2023-07-18-13-01-26
.. gh-issue: 106844
.. nonce: mci4xO
.. section: Windows

Fix integer overflow and truncating by the null character in
:func:`!_winapi.LCMapStringEx` which affects :func:`ntpath.normcase`.

..

.. date: 2023-06-08-11-30-17
.. gh-issue: 105436
.. nonce: 1qlDxw
.. section: Windows

Ensure that an empty environment block is terminated by two null characters,
as is required by Windows.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-16-14-31
.. gh-issue: 105146
.. nonce: gNjqq8
.. section: Windows

Updated the links at the end of the installer to point to Discourse rather
than the mailing lists.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-17-09-31
.. gh-issue: 103646
.. nonce: U8oGQx
.. section: Windows

When installed from the Microsoft Store, ``pip`` no longer defaults to
per-user installs. However, as the install directory is unwritable, it
should automatically decide to do a per-user install anyway. This should
resolve issues when ``pip`` is passed an option that conflicts with
``--user``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-11-38-53
.. gh-issue: 88745
.. nonce: cldf9G
.. section: Windows

Improve performance of :func:`shutil.copy2` by using the operating system's
``CopyFile2`` function. This may result in subtle changes to metadata copied
along with some files, bringing them in line with normal OS behavior.

..

.. date: 2023-05-24-21-00-57
.. gh-issue: 104820
.. nonce: ibyrpp
.. section: Windows

Fixes :func:`~os.stat` and related functions on file systems that do not
support file ID requests. This includes FAT32 and exFAT.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-19-26-28
.. gh-issue: 104803
.. nonce: gqxYml
.. section: Windows

Add :func:`os.path.isdevdrive` to detect whether a path is on a Windows Dev
Drive. Returns ``False`` on platforms that do not support Dev Drive, and is
absent on non-Windows platforms.

..

.. date: 2023-10-04-23-38-24
.. gh-issue: 109286
.. nonce: 1ZLMaq
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.43.1.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-22-35-22
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: -xJzaF
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.11.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-23-42-20
.. gh-issue: 99079
.. nonce: JAtoh1
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.9.

..

.. date: 2023-05-23-17-19-49
.. gh-issue: 104719
.. nonce: rvYXH-
.. section: IDLE

Remove IDLE's modification of tokenize.tabsize and test other uses of
tokenize data and methods.

..

.. date: 2023-09-27-23-31-54
.. gh-issue: 109991
.. nonce: sUUYY8
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 3.0.11 and multissltests to use
1.1.1w, 3.0.11, and 3.1.3.

..

.. date: 2023-08-25-22-40-12
.. gh-issue: 108494
.. nonce: 4RbDdu
.. section: Tools/Demos

`Argument Clinic <https://devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/>`__
now has a partial support of the :ref:`Limited API <limited-c-api>`: see
`documentation in the Python Developer's Guide
<https://devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/#clinic-howto-limited-capi>`__
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-15-19-50-49
.. gh-issue: 107704
.. nonce: Uu84vd
.. section: Tools/Demos

It is now possible to deprecate passing keyword arguments for
keyword-or-positional parameters with Argument Clinic, using the new ``/
[from X.Y]`` syntax. (To be read as *"positional-only from Python version
X.Y"*.) See `documentation in the Python Developer's Guide
<https://devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/#clinic-howto-deprecate-keyword>`__
for more information.

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-11-18-06
.. gh-issue: 107880
.. nonce: gBVVQ7
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic can now clone :meth:`!__init__` and :meth:`!__new__`
methods.

..

.. date: 2023-08-08-12-21-41
.. gh-issue: 104683
.. nonce: DRsAQE
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add ``--exclude`` option to Argument Clinic CLI.

..

.. date: 2023-08-07-16-30-48
.. gh-issue: 95065
.. nonce: -im4R5
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports overriding automatically generated signature by
using directive ``@text_signature``. See `documentation in the Python
Developer's Guide
<https://devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/#clinic-howto-override-signature>`__

..

.. date: 2023-08-04-00-04-40
.. gh-issue: 107609
.. nonce: 2DqgtL
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix duplicate module check in Argument Clinic. Previously, a duplicate
definition would incorrectly be silently accepted. Patch by Erlend E.
Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-07-30-23-32-16
.. gh-issue: 107467
.. nonce: 5O9p3G
.. section: Tools/Demos

The Argument Clinic command-line tool now prints to stderr instead of stdout
on failure.

..

.. date: 2023-07-21-23-16-05
.. gh-issue: 106970
.. nonce: NLRnml
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix bugs in the Argument Clinic ``destination <name> clear`` command; the
destination buffers would never be cleared, and the ``destination``
directive parser would simply continue to the fault handler after processing
the command. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland.

..

.. date: 2023-07-13-12-08-35
.. gh-issue: 106706
.. nonce: 29zp8E
.. section: Tools/Demos

Change bytecode syntax for families to remove redundant name matching pseudo
syntax.

..

.. date: 2023-07-03-14-06-19
.. gh-issue: 106359
.. nonce: RfJuR0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now explicitly forbids "kwarg splats" in function calls used
as annotations.

..

.. date: 2023-04-05-07-19-36
.. gh-issue: 103186
.. nonce: yEozgK
.. section: Tools/Demos

``freeze`` now fetches ``CONFIG_ARGS`` from the original CPython instance
the Makefile uses to call utility scripts. Patch by Ijtaba Hussain.

..

.. date: 2022-07-23-00-33-28
.. gh-issue: 95065
.. nonce: NfCCpp
.. section: Tools/Demos

It is now possible to deprecate passing parameters positionally with
Argument Clinic, using the new ``* [from X.Y]`` syntax. (To be read as
*"keyword-only from Python version X.Y"*.) See `documentation in the Python
Developer's Guide
<https://devguide.python.org/development-tools/clinic/#clinic-howto-deprecate-positional>`__
for more information. Patch by Erlend E. Aasland with help from Alex
Waygood, Nikita Sobolev, and Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. date: 2023-10-11-17-29-52
.. gh-issue: 85283
.. nonce: OsqIBF
.. section: C API

If the :c:macro:`Py_LIMITED_API` macro is defined,
:c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE`, :c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE_BUILTIN` and
:c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE_MODULE` macros are now undefined by ``<Python.h>``.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-19-01-20
.. gh-issue: 110289
.. nonce: YBIHEz
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyUnicode_EqualToUTF8AndSize` and
:c:func:`PyUnicode_EqualToUTF8` functions.

..

.. date: 2023-10-03-06-19-10
.. gh-issue: 110235
.. nonce: uec5AG
.. section: C API

Raise :exc:`TypeError` for duplicate/unknown fields in ``PyStructSequence``
constructor. Patched by Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2023-10-02-13-39-57
.. gh-issue: 110014
.. nonce: gfQ4jU
.. section: C API

Remove undocumented ``PY_TIMEOUT_MAX`` constant from the limited C API.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-17-21-47-31
.. gh-issue: 109521
.. nonce: JDF6i9
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyImport_GetImporter` now sets RuntimeError if it fails to get
:data:`sys.path_hooks` or :data:`sys.path_importer_cache` or they are not
list and dict correspondingly. Previously it could return NULL without
setting error in obscure cases, crash or raise SystemError if these
attributes have wrong type.

..

.. date: 2023-09-12-13-09-36
.. gh-issue: 108724
.. nonce: -yMsC8
.. section: C API

Add :c:type:`PyMutex` internal-only lightweight locking API.

..

.. date: 2023-09-06-00-14-49
.. gh-issue: 85283
.. nonce: GKY0Cc
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PySys_AuditTuple` function: similar to :c:func:`PySys_Audit`,
but pass event arguments as a Python :class:`tuple` object.  Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-04-11-47-12
.. gh-issue: 108867
.. nonce: Cr_LKd
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked()` function: similar to
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Get()`, but don't kill the process with a fatal error
if it is NULL. The caller is responsible to check if the result is NULL.
Previously, the function was private and known as
``_PyThreadState_UncheckedGet()``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-02-22-35-55
.. gh-issue: 108765
.. nonce: 4TOdBT
.. section: C API

``Python.h`` no longer includes the ``<ctype.h>`` standard header file. If
needed, it should now be included explicitly. For example, it provides
``isalpha()`` and ``tolower()`` functions which are locale dependent. Python
provides locale independent functions, like :c:func:`!Py_ISALPHA` and
:c:func:`!Py_TOLOWER`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-21-10-29
.. gh-issue: 108765
.. nonce: eeXtYF
.. section: C API

``Python.h`` no longer includes the ``<unistd.h>`` standard header file. If
needed, it should now be included explicitly. For example, it provides the
functions: ``close()``, ``getpagesize()``, ``getpid()`` and ``sysconf()``.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-20-41-49
.. gh-issue: 108765
.. nonce: 5dXc1r
.. section: C API

``Python.h`` no longer includes the ``<ieeefp.h>`` standard header. It was
included for the ``finite()`` function which is now provided by the
``<math.h>`` header. It should now be included explicitly if needed. Remove
also the ``HAVE_IEEEFP_H`` macro. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-18-42-31
.. gh-issue: 108765
.. nonce: IyYNDu
.. section: C API

``Python.h`` no longer includes these standard header files: ``<time.h>``,
``<sys/select.h>`` and ``<sys/time.h>``. If needed, they should now be
included explicitly. For example, ``<time.h>`` provides the ``clock()`` and
``gmtime()`` functions, ``<sys/select.h>`` provides the ``select()``
function, and ``<sys/time.h>`` provides the ``futimes()``,
``gettimeofday()`` and ``setitimer()`` functions. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-16-28-09
.. gh-issue: 108511
.. nonce: gg-QDG
.. section: C API

Add functions :c:func:`PyObject_HasAttrWithError`,
:c:func:`PyObject_HasAttrStringWithError`,
:c:func:`PyMapping_HasKeyWithError` and
:c:func:`PyMapping_HasKeyStringWithError`.

..

.. date: 2023-09-01-15-35-05
.. gh-issue: 107073
.. nonce: zCz0iN
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyObject_VisitManagedDict` and
:c:func:`PyObject_ClearManagedDict` functions which must be called by the
traverse and clear functions of a type using
:c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_DICT` flag. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-30-02-54-06
.. gh-issue: 108634
.. nonce: oV3Xzk
.. section: C API

Python built with :file:`configure` :option:`--with-trace-refs` (tracing
references) now supports the :ref:`Limited API <limited-c-api>`.  Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-24-20-08-02
.. gh-issue: 108014
.. nonce: 20DOSS
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyLong_AsInt` function: similar to :c:func:`PyLong_AsLong`, but
store the result in a C :c:expr:`int` instead of a C :c:expr:`long`.
Previously, it was known as the private function :c:func:`!_PyLong_AsInt`
(with an underscore prefix). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-18-45-20
.. gh-issue: 108314
.. nonce: nOlmwq
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyDict_ContainsString` function: same as
:c:func:`PyDict_Contains`, but *key* is specified as a :c:expr:`const char*`
UTF-8 encoded bytes string, rather than a :c:expr:`PyObject*`. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-22-13-00-54
.. gh-issue: 108337
.. nonce: wceHZm
.. section: C API

Add atomic operations on additional data types in pyatomic.h.

..

.. date: 2023-08-16-17-16-19
.. gh-issue: 108014
.. nonce: wXN3CF
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` function: check if the main Python interpreter
is :term:`shutting down <interpreter shutdown>`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-08-14-10-59-03
.. gh-issue: 107916
.. nonce: KH4Muo
.. section: C API

C API functions :c:func:`PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename`,
:c:func:`PyErr_SetExcFromWindowsErrWithFilename` and
:c:func:`PyErr_SetFromWindowsErrWithFilename` save now the error code before
calling :c:func:`PyUnicode_DecodeFSDefault`.

..

.. date: 2023-08-13-12-33-00
.. gh-issue: 107915
.. nonce: jQ0wOi
.. section: C API

Such C API functions as ``PyErr_SetString()``, ``PyErr_Format()``,
``PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilename()`` and many others no longer crash or
ignore errors if it failed to format the error message or decode the
filename. Instead, they keep a corresponding error.

..

.. date: 2023-08-10-11-12-25
.. gh-issue: 107810
.. nonce: oJ40Qx
.. section: C API

Improve :exc:`DeprecationWarning` for uses of :c:type:`PyType_Spec` with
metaclasses that have custom ``tp_new``.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-17-23-08
.. gh-issue: 107249
.. nonce: xqk2ke
.. section: C API

Implement the :c:macro:`Py_UNUSED` macro for Windows MSVC compiler. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-25-13-41-09
.. gh-issue: 107226
.. nonce: N919zH
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyModule_AddObjectRef` is now only available in the limited API
version 3.10 or later.

..

.. date: 2023-07-22-14-40-48
.. gh-issue: 106320
.. nonce: H3u7x4
.. section: C API

Remove private ``_PyUnicode_AsString()`` alias to
:c:func:`PyUnicode_AsUTF8`. It was kept for backward compatibility with
Python 3.0 - 3.2. The :c:func:`PyUnicode_AsUTF8` is available since Python
3.3. The :c:func:`PyUnicode_AsUTF8String` function can be used to keep
compatibility with Python 3.2 and older. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-11-01-07-39
.. gh-issue: 106572
.. nonce: y1b35X
.. section: C API

Convert :c:func:`PyObject_DelAttr` and :c:func:`PyObject_DelAttrString`
macros to functions. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-08-12-24-17
.. gh-issue: 106307
.. nonce: FVnkBw
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyMapping_GetOptionalItem` function.

..

.. date: 2023-07-07-19-14-00
.. gh-issue: 106521
.. nonce: Veh9f3
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyObject_GetOptionalAttr` and
:c:func:`PyObject_GetOptionalAttrString` functions.

..

.. date: 2023-07-02-00-00-20
.. gh-issue: 106320
.. nonce: tZWcvG
.. section: C API

Remove ``_PyInterpreterState_Get()`` alias to
:c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Get()` which was kept for backward compatibility
with Python 3.8. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-07-01-21-23-33
.. gh-issue: 106316
.. nonce: hp2Ijw
.. section: C API

Remove ``cpython/pytime.h`` header file: it only contained private
functions. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-30-09-33-25
.. gh-issue: 106023
.. nonce: YvYiE4
.. section: C API

Remove private ``_PyObject_FastCall()`` function: use
``PyObject_Vectorcall()`` which is available since Python 3.8 (:pep:`590`).
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-28-02-30-50
.. gh-issue: 106168
.. nonce: NFOZPv
.. section: C API

If Python is built in :ref:`debug mode <debug-build>` or :option:`with
assertions <--with-assertions>`, :c:func:`PyTuple_SET_ITEM` and
:c:func:`PyList_SET_ITEM` now check the index argument with an assertion. If
the assertion fails, make sure that the size is set before. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-25-18-01-27
.. gh-issue: 106084
.. nonce: PEzqU3
.. section: C API

Remove the old aliases to functions calling functions which were kept for
backward compatibility with Python 3.8 provisional API:

* ``_PyObject_CallMethodNoArgs()``: use ``PyObject_CallMethodNoArgs()``
* ``_PyObject_CallMethodOneArg()``: use ``PyObject_CallMethodOneArg()``
* ``_PyObject_CallOneArg()``: use ``PyObject_CallOneArg()``
* ``_PyObject_FastCallDict()``: use ``PyObject_VectorcallDict()``
* ``_PyObject_Vectorcall()``: use ``PyObject_Vectorcall()``
* ``_PyObject_VectorcallMethod()``: use ``PyObject_VectorcallMethod()``
* ``_PyVectorcall_Function()``: use ``PyVectorcall_Function()``

Just remove the underscore prefix to update your code. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-23-02-57-15
.. gh-issue: 106004
.. nonce: -OToh6
.. section: C API

Adds :c:func:`PyDict_GetItemRef` and :c:func:`PyDict_GetItemStringRef`
functions: similar to :c:func:`PyDict_GetItemWithError` but returning a
:term:`strong reference` instead of a :term:`borrowed reference`. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-22-00-25-55
.. gh-issue: 105927
.. nonce: GRxZtI
.. section: C API

Deprecate the :c:func:`PyWeakref_GetObject` and
:c:func:`PyWeakref_GET_OBJECT` functions: use the new
:c:func:`PyWeakref_GetRef` function instead. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-20-08-59-05
.. gh-issue: 105927
.. nonce: DfGeEA
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyWeakref_GetRef` function: similar to
:c:func:`PyWeakref_GetObject` but returns a :term:`strong reference`, or
``NULL`` if the referent is no longer live. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-19-20-02-16
.. gh-issue: 105922
.. nonce: o4T6wO
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyImport_AddModuleRef`: similar to
:c:func:`PyImport_AddModule`, but return a :term:`strong reference` instead
of a :term:`borrowed reference`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-13-14-24-55
.. gh-issue: 105227
.. nonce: HDL9aF
.. section: C API

The new :c:func:`PyType_GetDict` provides the dictionary for the given type
object that is normally exposed by ``cls.__dict__``.  Normally it's
sufficient to use :c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_dict`, but for the static
builtin types :c:member:`!tp_dict` is now always ``NULL``.
:c:func:`!PyType_GetDict()` provides the correct dict object instead.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-23-34-25
.. gh-issue: 105375
.. nonce: n7amiF
.. section: C API

Fix a bug in :c:func:`PyErr_WarnExplicit` where an exception could end up
being overwritten if the API failed internally.

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-19-16-57
.. gh-issue: 105603
.. nonce: -z6G22
.. section: C API

We've renamed the new (in 3.12) ``PyInterpreterConfig.own_gil`` to
``PyInterpreterConfig.gil`` and changed the meaning of the value from "bool"
to an integer with supported values of ``PyInterpreterConfig_DEFAULT_GIL``,
``PyInterpreterConfig_SHARED_GIL``, and ``PyInterpreterConfig_OWN_GIL``. The
default is "shared".

..

.. date: 2023-06-09-12-35-55
.. gh-issue: 105387
.. nonce: wM_oL-
.. section: C API

In the limited C API version 3.12, :c:func:`Py_INCREF` and
:c:func:`Py_DECREF` functions are now implemented as opaque function calls
to hide implementation details. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-17-43-28
.. gh-issue: 105396
.. nonce: FQJG5B
.. section: C API

Deprecate the :c:func:`!PyImport_ImportModuleNoBlock` function which is just
an alias to :c:func:`PyImport_ImportModule` since Python 3.3. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-14-14-41
.. gh-issue: 103968
.. nonce: BTO6II
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyType_FromMetaclass` now allows metaclasses with ``tp_new`` set to
``NULL``.

..

.. date: 2023-06-06-10-57-18
.. gh-issue: 105268
.. nonce: OTJUko
.. section: C API

Remove the old private, undocumented and untested ``_PyGC_FINALIZED()``
macro which was kept for backward compatibility with Python 3.8 and older.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-01-11-24-03
.. gh-issue: 105182
.. nonce: l5sCw4
.. section: C API

Remove ``PyEval_AcquireLock()`` and ``PyEval_ReleaseLock()`` functions,
deprecated in Python 3.2. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-01-11-23-28
.. gh-issue: 105182
.. nonce: kLEHl-
.. section: C API

Remove ``PyEval_InitThreads()`` and ``PyEval_ThreadsInitialized()``
functions, deprecated in Python 3.9. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-06-01-09-40-30
.. gh-issue: 105145
.. nonce: WOOE-w
.. section: C API

Deprecate old Python initialization functions:

* :c:func:`PySys_ResetWarnOptions`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetExecPrefix`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetPath`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetPrefix`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetProgramFullPath`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetProgramName`
* :c:func:`!Py_GetPythonHome`

Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-19-38-45
.. gh-issue: 85275
.. nonce: doojgE
.. section: C API

``PyObject_AsCharBuffer()``, ``PyObject_AsReadBuffer()``,
``PyObject_CheckReadBuffer()``, and ``PyObject_AsWriteBuffer()`` are
removed. Please migrate to new buffer protocol; :c:func:`PyObject_GetBuffer`
and :c:func:`PyBuffer_Release`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-18-37-57
.. gh-issue: 105156
.. nonce: R4El5V
.. section: C API

Deprecate the old ``Py_UNICODE`` and ``PY_UNICODE_TYPE`` types: use directly
the :c:type:`wchar_t` type instead. Since Python 3.3, ``Py_UNICODE`` and
``PY_UNICODE_TYPE`` are just aliases to :c:type:`wchar_t`. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-31-16-51-18
.. gh-issue: 105145
.. nonce: b3B6lJ
.. section: C API

Remove the following old functions to configure the Python initialization,
deprecated in Python 3.11:

* ``PySys_AddWarnOptionUnicode()``
* ``PySys_AddWarnOption()``
* ``PySys_AddXOption()``
* ``PySys_HasWarnOptions()``
* ``PySys_SetArgvEx()``
* ``PySys_SetArgv()``
* ``PySys_SetPath()``
* ``Py_SetPath()``
* ``Py_SetProgramName()``
* ``Py_SetPythonHome()``
* ``Py_SetStandardStreamEncoding()``
* ``_Py_SetProgramFullPath()``

Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-19-11-09
.. gh-issue: 105107
.. nonce: YQwMnm
.. section: C API

Remove functions deprecated in Python 3.9.

* ``PyEval_CallObject()``, ``PyEval_CallObjectWithKeywords()``: use
  :c:func:`PyObject_CallNoArgs` and :c:func:`PyObject_Call` (positional
  arguments must not be *NULL*) instead.
* ``PyEval_CallFunction()``: use :c:func:`PyObject_CallFunction` instead.
* ``PyEval_CallMethod()``: use :c:func:`PyObject_CallMethod` instead.
* ``PyCFunction_Call()``: use :c:func:`PyObject_Call` instead.

Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-17-45-32
.. gh-issue: 105115
.. nonce: iRho1K
.. section: C API

``PyTypeObject.tp_bases`` (and ``tp_mro``) for builtin static types are now
shared by all interpreters, whereas in 3.12-beta1 they were stored on
``PyInterpreterState``.  Also note that now the tuples are immortal objects.

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-10-15-13
.. gh-issue: 105071
.. nonce: dPtp7c
.. section: C API

Add ``PyUnstable_Exc_PrepReraiseStar`` to the unstable C api to expose the
implementation of :keyword:`except* <except_star>`.

..

.. date: 2023-05-29-16-09-27
.. gh-issue: 104922
.. nonce: L23qaU
.. section: C API

``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN`` is no longer required to use ``'#'`` formats in APIs
like :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTuple` and :c:func:`Py_BuildValue`. They uses
``Py_ssize_t`` for ``'#'`` regardless ``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN``.

..

.. date: 2023-05-25-15-44-48
.. gh-issue: 104584
.. nonce: cSAoRh
.. section: C API

Add an unstable C API for hooking in an optimizer. This is mainly internal,
but marked "unstable" to allow third-party experimentation.

..

.. date: 2023-05-19-10-22-34
.. gh-issue: 104668
.. nonce: MLX1g9
.. section: C API

Don't call :c:var:`PyOS_InputHook` or :c:var:`PyOS_ReadlineFunctionPointer`
in subinterpreters, since it's generally difficult to avoid using global
state in their registered callbacks. This also avoids situations where
extensions may find themselves running in a subinterpreter they don't
support (or haven't yet been loaded in).

..

.. bpo: 42327
.. date: 2020-11-11-22-36-29
.. nonce: ODSZBM
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyModule_Add` function: similar to
:c:func:`PyModule_AddObjectRef` and :c:func:`PyModule_AddObject`, but always
steals a reference to the value.

..

.. bpo: 40309
.. date: 2020-06-25-09-44-59
.. nonce: CuoGoQ
.. section: C API

Properly handle trailing spaces before closing parenthesis in
:c:func:`Py_BuildValue` format strings.
