.. date: 2024-09-07-12-14-54
.. gh-issue: 123797
.. nonce: yFDeug
.. release date: 2024-10-01
.. section: macOS

Check for runtime availability of ``ptsname_r`` function on macos.

..

.. date: 2024-09-27-13-40-25
.. gh-issue: 124609
.. nonce: WaKk8G
.. section: Windows

Fix ``_Py_ThreadId`` for Windows builds using MinGW. Patch by Tony Roberts.

..

.. date: 2024-09-20-11-18-50
.. gh-issue: 124254
.. nonce: iPin-L
.. section: Windows

Ensures experimental free-threaded binaries remain installed when updating.

..

.. date: 2024-09-10-19-23-00
.. gh-issue: 123915
.. nonce: yZMEDO
.. section: Windows

Ensure that ``Tools\msi\buildrelease.bat`` uses different directories for
AMD64 and ARM64 builds.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-12-39-34
.. gh-issue: 124378
.. nonce: Ywwgia
.. section: Tests

Updated ``test_ttk`` to pass with Tcl/Tk 8.6.15.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-18-34-48
.. gh-issue: 124538
.. nonce: nXZk4R
.. section: Library

Fixed crash when using :func:`gc.get_referents` on a capsule object.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-12-14-58
.. gh-issue: 124498
.. nonce: Ozxs55
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`typing.TypeAliasType` not to be generic, when ``type_params`` is
an empty tuple.

..

.. date: 2024-09-24-21-15-27
.. gh-issue: 123017
.. nonce: dSAr2f
.. section: Library

Due to unreliable results on some devices, :func:`time.strftime` no longer
accepts negative years on Android.

..

.. date: 2024-09-24-19-32-14
.. gh-issue: 123014
.. nonce: zVcfkZ
.. section: Library

:func:`os.pidfd_open` and :func:`signal.pidfd_send_signal` are now
unavailable when building against Android API levels older than 31, since
the underlying system calls may cause a crash.

..

.. date: 2024-09-19-11-47-39
.. gh-issue: 124248
.. nonce: g7rufd
.. section: Library

Fixed potential crash when using :mod:`struct` to process zero-width 'Pascal
string' fields (``0p``).

..

.. date: 2024-09-19-03-46-59
.. gh-issue: 87041
.. nonce: 9Ox7Bv
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :mod:`argparse` where lengthy subparser argument help is
incorrectly indented.

..

.. date: 2024-09-18-17-45-52
.. gh-issue: 124212
.. nonce: n6kIby
.. section: Library

Fix invalid variable in :mod:`venv` handling of failed symlink on Windows

..

.. date: 2024-09-17-18-06-42
.. gh-issue: 124171
.. nonce: PHCvRJ
.. section: Library

Add workaround for broken :c:func:`!fmod()` implementations on Windows, that
loose zero sign (e.g. ``fmod(-10, 1)`` returns ``0.0``).  Patch by Sergey B
Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-09-13-10-34-19
.. gh-issue: 123934
.. nonce: yMe7mL
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`unittest.mock.MagicMock` reseting magic methods return values
after ``.reset_mock(return_value=True)`` was called.

..

.. date: 2024-09-11-19-12-23
.. gh-issue: 123968
.. nonce: OwHON_
.. section: Library

Fix the command-line interface for the :mod:`random` module to select floats
between 0 and N, not 1 and N.

..

.. date: 2024-09-10-11-26-14
.. gh-issue: 123892
.. nonce: 2gzIrz
.. section: Library

Add ``"_wmi"`` to :data:`sys.stdlib_module_names`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-09-02-20-34-04
.. gh-issue: 123339
.. nonce: czgcSu
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`inspect.getsource` for classes in :mod:`collections.abc` and
:mod:`decimal` (for pure Python implementation) modules.
:func:`inspect.getcomments` now raises OSError instead of IndexError if the
``__firstlineno__`` value for a class is out of bound.

..

.. date: 2024-08-15-09-45-34
.. gh-issue: 121735
.. nonce: _1q0qf
.. section: Library

When working with zip archives, importlib.resources now properly honors
module-adjacent references (e.g. ``files(pkg.mod)`` and not just
``files(pkg)``).

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-12-38-14
.. gh-issue: 122145
.. nonce: sTO8nX
.. section: Library

Fix an issue when reporting tracebacks corresponding to Python code emitting
an empty AST body. Patch by Nikita Sobolev and Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-03-14-23-04
.. gh-issue: 119004
.. nonce: L5MoUu
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :ref:`OrderedDict.__eq__ <collections_OrderedDict__eq__>`
when operands are mutated during the check. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. bpo: 44864
.. date: 2021-08-24-19-37-46
.. nonce: KzxaDh
.. section: Library

Do not translate user-provided strings in :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser`.

..

.. date: 2024-09-21-23-12-18
.. gh-issue: 112938
.. nonce: OeiDru
.. section: IDLE

Fix uninteruptable hang when Shell gets rapid continuous output.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-14-54-24
.. gh-issue: 120104
.. nonce: j_thj4
.. section: IDLE

Fix padding in config and search dialog windows in IDLE.

..

.. date: 2024-09-27-16-47-48
.. gh-issue: 124720
.. nonce: nVSTVb
.. section: Documentation

Update "Using Python on a Mac" section of the "Python Setup and Usage"
document and include information on installing free-threading support.

..

.. date: 2024-09-19-19-33-25
.. gh-issue: 116622
.. nonce: M65UZ6
.. section: Documentation

Add an Android platform guide, and flag modules not available on Android.

..

.. date: 2024-09-30-21-02-10
.. gh-issue: 124567
.. nonce: tv_B_C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert the incremental GC (in 3.13), since it's not clear the benefits
outweigh the costs at this point.

..

.. date: 2024-09-27-17-18-53
.. gh-issue: 124642
.. nonce: OCjhBJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed scalability issue in free-threaded builds for lock-free reads from
dictionaries in multi-threaded scenarios

..

.. date: 2024-09-26-17-55-34
.. gh-issue: 116510
.. nonce: dhn8w8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that can cause a crash when sub-interpreters use "basic"
single-phase extension modules.  Shared objects could refer to PyGC_Head
nodes that had been freed as part of interpreter cleanup.

..

.. date: 2024-09-26-12-19-13
.. gh-issue: 124547
.. nonce: P_SHfU
.. section: Core and Builtins

When deallocating an object with inline values whose ``__dict__`` is still
live: if memory allocation for the inline values fails, clear the
dictionary. Prevents an interpreter crash.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-14-45-56
.. gh-issue: 124513
.. nonce: ywiXtr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in FrameLocalsProxy constructor: check the number of arguments.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-11-53-22
.. gh-issue: 124442
.. nonce: EXC1Ve
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix nondeterminism in compilation by sorting the value of
:attr:`~type.__static_attributes__`. Patch by kp2pml30.

..

.. date: 2024-09-23-15-23-14
.. gh-issue: 123856
.. nonce: yrgJ9m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix PyREPL failure when a keyboard interrupt is triggered after using a
history search

..

.. date: 2024-09-23-13-25-27
.. gh-issue: 65961
.. nonce: LDqXV2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Document the deprecation of setting and using ``__package__`` and
``__cached__``.

..

.. date: 2024-09-13-02-25-06
.. gh-issue: 124027
.. nonce: to_9DY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support ``<page up>``, ``<page down>``, and ``<delete>`` keys in the Python
REPL when ``$TERM`` is set to ``vt100``.

..

.. date: 2024-09-10-13-27-16
.. gh-issue: 77894
.. nonce: ZC-Olu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crash in the garbage collector when it tries to break a
reference loop containing a :class:`memoryview` object. Now a
:class:`!memoryview` object can only be cleared if there are no buffers that
refer it.

..

.. date: 2024-09-02-20-36-45
.. gh-issue: 123339
.. nonce: QcmpSs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Setting the :attr:`!__module__` attribute for a class now removes the
``__firstlineno__`` item from the type's dict, so they will no longer be
inconsistent.

..

.. date: 2024-09-18-18-40-30
.. gh-issue: 124160
.. nonce: Zy-VKi
.. section: C API

Fix crash when importing modules containing state and single-phase
initialization in a subinterpreter.

..

.. date: 2024-09-12-16-16-24
.. gh-issue: 123880
.. nonce: 2-8vcj
.. section: C API

Fixed a bug that prevented circular imports of extension modules that use
single-phase initialization.

..

.. date: 2024-09-27-15-58-10
.. gh-issue: 124487
.. nonce: PAZTQf
.. section: Build

Windows builds now use Windows 8.1 as their API baseline (installation
already required Windows 8.1).

..

.. date: 2024-09-13-17-48-37
.. gh-issue: 124043
.. nonce: Bruxpq
.. section: Build

Building using :option:`--with-trace-refs` is (temporarily) disallowed when
the GIL is disabled.
