.. date: 2024-07-13-11-48-20
.. gh-issue: 59022
.. nonce: fYNbQ8
.. release date: 2024-07-31
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :func:`pkgutil.extend_path`. Patch by Andreas Stocker.

..

.. date: 2024-07-13-11-04-44
.. gh-issue: 99242
.. nonce: aGxnwz
.. section: Tests

:func:`os.getloadavg` may throw :exc:`OSError` when running regression tests
under certain conditions (e.g. chroot). This error is now caught and
ignored, since reporting load average is optional.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-13-11-28
.. gh-issue: 122133
.. nonce: 0mPeta
.. section: Security

Authenticate the socket connection for the ``socket.socketpair()`` fallback
on platforms where ``AF_UNIX`` is not available like Windows.

Patch by Gregory P. Smith <greg@krypto.org> and Seth Larson
<seth@python.org>. Reported by Ellie <el@horse64.org>

..

.. date: 2024-07-18-13-17-47
.. gh-issue: 121957
.. nonce: QemKLU
.. section: Security

Fixed missing audit events around interactive use of Python, now also
properly firing for ``python -i``, as well as for ``python -m asyncio``. The
events in question are ``cpython.run_stdin`` and ``cpython.run_startup``.

..

.. date: 2024-07-29-16-47-08
.. gh-issue: 122400
.. nonce: fM0YSv
.. section: Library

Handle :exc:`ValueError`\s raised by :func:`os.stat` in
:class:`filecmp.dircmp` and :func:`filecmp.cmpfiles`. Patch by Bénédikt
Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-29-10-24-48
.. gh-issue: 122311
.. nonce: xChV1b
.. section: Library

Fix some error messages in :mod:`pickle`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-21-21-13
.. gh-issue: 122332
.. nonce: fvw88r
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault with :meth:`asyncio.Task.get_coro` when using an eager task
factory.

..

.. date: 2024-07-25-15-41-14
.. gh-issue: 105733
.. nonce: o3koJA
.. section: Library

:func:`ctypes.ARRAY` is now :term:`soft deprecated`: it no longer emits
deprecation warnings and is not scheduled for removal.

..

.. date: 2024-07-24-09-29-55
.. gh-issue: 122087
.. nonce: FdBrWo
.. section: Library

Restore :func:`inspect.ismethoddescriptor` and :func:`inspect.isroutine`
returning ``False`` for :class:`functools.partial` objects.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-15-30-23
.. gh-issue: 122170
.. nonce: Z9gi3Y
.. section: Library

Handle :exc:`ValueError`\s raised by :func:`os.stat` in :mod:`linecache`.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-09-14-44
.. gh-issue: 82951
.. nonce: -F5p5A
.. section: Library

Serializing objects with complex ``__qualname__`` (such as unbound methods
and nested classes) by name no longer involves serializing parent objects by
value in pickle protocols < 4.

..

.. date: 2024-07-22-08-14-04
.. gh-issue: 113785
.. nonce: 6B_KNB
.. section: Library

:mod:`csv` now correctly parses numeric fields (when used with
:const:`csv.QUOTE_NONNUMERIC` or :const:`csv.QUOTE_STRINGS`) which start
with an escape character.

..

.. date: 2024-07-21-18-03-30
.. gh-issue: 122088
.. nonce: vi2bP-
.. section: Library

:func:`@warnings.deprecated <warnings.deprecated>` now copies the coroutine
status of functions and methods so that :func:`inspect.iscoroutinefunction`
returns the correct result.

..

.. date: 2024-07-14-11-18-28
.. gh-issue: 120930
.. nonce: Kuo4L0
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug introduced by gh-92081 that added an incorrect extra blank to
encoded words occurring in wrapped headers.

..

.. date: 2024-07-08-03-45-34
.. gh-issue: 121474
.. nonce: NsvrUN
.. section: Library

Fix missing sanity check for ``parties`` arg in :class:`threading.Barrier`
constructor. Patch by Clinton Christian (pygeek).

..

.. date: 2024-06-09-19-53-11
.. gh-issue: 120289
.. nonce: s4HXR0
.. section: Library

Fixed the use-after-free issue in :mod:`cProfile` by disallowing
``disable()`` and ``clear()`` in external timers.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-18-02-55
.. gh-issue: 122482
.. nonce: TerE0g
.. section: IDLE

Change About IDLE to direct users to discuss.python.org instead of the now
unused idle-dev email and mailing list.

..

.. date: 2024-07-29-10-55-46
.. gh-issue: 116090
.. nonce: p1MhU0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue in JIT builds that prevented some :keyword:`for` loops from
correctly firing :monitoring-event:`RAISE` monitoring events.

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-21-26-33
.. gh-issue: 122208
.. nonce: z8KHsY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Dictionary watchers now only deliver the PyDict_EVENT_ADDED event when the
insertion is in a known good state to succeed.

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-14-05-51
.. gh-issue: 122300
.. nonce: SVIF-l
.. section: Core and Builtins

Preserve AST nodes for f-string with single-element format specifiers. Patch
by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-07-26-13-56-32
.. gh-issue: 120906
.. nonce: qBh2I9
.. section: Core and Builtins

:attr:`frame.f_locals` now supports arbitrary hashable objects as keys.

..

.. date: 2024-07-21-01-23-54
.. gh-issue: 122029
.. nonce: gKv-e2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit ``c_call`` events in :func:`sys.setprofile` when a ``PyMethodObject``
pointing to a ``PyCFunction`` is called.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-15-28-05
.. gh-issue: 122026
.. nonce: sta2Ca
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that caused the tokenizer to not correctly identify mismatched
parentheses inside f-strings in some situations. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-04-11-36
.. gh-issue: 118934
.. nonce: fbDqve
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make ``PyEval_GetLocals`` return borrowed reference

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-23-48-26
.. gh-issue: 116622
.. nonce: yTTtil
.. section: C API

Make :any:`PyObject_Print` work around a bug in Android and OpenBSD which
prevented it from throwing an exception when trying to write to a read-only
stream.

..

.. date: 2024-07-21-17-40-07
.. gh-issue: 121489
.. nonce: SUMFCr
.. section: C API

Export private :c:func:`!_PyBytes_Join` again.

..

.. date: 2024-07-18-07-53-07
.. gh-issue: 120522
.. nonce: dg3o5A
.. section: Build

Added a :option:`--with-app-store-compliance` option to patch out known
issues with macOS/iOS App Store review processes.
