.. date: 2026-06-09-01-27-48
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: MDDDD6
.. release date: 2026-06-10
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 8.6.18.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-10-40-00
.. gh-issue: 150644
.. nonce: zLWyjj
.. section: macOS

When system logging is enabled (with ``config.use_system_logger``, messages
are now tagged as public. This allows the macOS 26 system logger to view
messages without special configuration.

..

.. date: 2025-10-14-00-17-48
.. gh-issue: 115119
.. nonce: 470I1N
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use libmpdecimal 4.0.1.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-04-21
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: O2NVrd
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.21.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-40-17
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: 9si8Fo
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.21.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-52-52
.. gh-issue: 151130
.. nonce: 1vslPH
.. section: Tests

Add more tests for ``PyWeakref_*`` C API.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-14-53-23
.. gh-issue: 149776
.. nonce: orqgsn
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket on Linux kernel 7.1 and newer: skip UDP Lite tests if it's
not supported. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-27-17
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: ng1cPU
.. section: Security

Bumps the OpenSSL version to 3.0.21 on Android.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-09-36-20
.. gh-issue: 150599
.. nonce: nlHqU-
.. section: Security

Fix a possible stack buffer overflow in :mod:`bz2` when a
:class:`bz2.BZ2Decompressor` is reused after a decompression error. The
decompressor now becomes unusable after libbz2 reports an error.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-17-46-00
.. gh-issue: 149835
.. nonce: EebFlk
.. section: Security

:func:`shutil.move` now resolves symlinks via :func:`os.path.realpath` when
checking whether the destination is inside the source directory, preventing
a symlink-based bypass of that guard.

..

.. date: 2026-05-11-21-15-07
.. gh-issue: 149698
.. nonce: OudOcW
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.1
for the fix for :cve:`2026-45186`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-18-05-32
.. gh-issue: 87451
.. nonce: XkKB6M
.. section: Security

The :mod:`ftplib` module's undocumented ``ftpcp`` function no longer trusts
the IPv4 address value returned from the source server in response to the
``PASV`` command by default, completing the fix for CVE-2021-4189.  As with
:class:`ftplib.FTP`, the former behavior can be re-enabled by setting the
``trust_server_pasv_ipv4_address`` attribute on the source
:class:`ftplib.FTP` instance to ``True``.  Thanks to Qi Deng at Aurascape AI
for the report.

..

.. date: 2026-05-03-21-00-00
.. gh-issue: 149486
.. nonce: tarflt
.. section: Security

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now validates link targets using the same
normalised value that is written to disk, strips trailing separators from
the member name when resolving a symlink's directory, and rejects link
members that would replace the destination directory itself. This closes
several path-traversal bypasses of the ``data`` extraction filter.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-16-36-11
.. gh-issue: 149079
.. nonce: vKl-LM
.. section: Security

Fix a potential denial of service in :func:`unicodedata.normalize`. The
canonical ordering step of Unicode normalization used a quadratic-time
insertion sort for reordering combining characters, which could be exploited
with crafted input containing many combining characters in non-canonical
order. Replaced with a linear-time counting sort for long runs.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-19-30-45
.. gh-issue: 149018
.. nonce: a9SqWb
.. section: Security

Improved protection against XML hash-flooding attacks in
:mod:`xml.parsers.expat` and :mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree` when Python is
compiled with libExpat 2.8.0 or later.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-17-49-58
.. gh-issue: 149017
.. nonce: EiVFPo
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.0.

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-13-46-30
.. gh-issue: 90309
.. nonce: srvj9q
.. section: Security

Base64-encode values when embedding cookies to JavaScript using the
:meth:`http.cookies.BaseCookie.js_output` method to avoid injection and
escaping.

..

.. date: 2026-04-20-15-31-37
.. gh-issue: 148808
.. nonce: _Z8JL0
.. section: Security

Added buffer boundary check when using ``nbytes`` parameter with
:meth:`!asyncio.AbstractEventLoop.sock_recvfrom_into`. Only relevant for
Windows and the :class:`asyncio.ProactorEventLoop`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-10-16-28-21
.. gh-issue: 148395
.. nonce: kfzm0G
.. section: Security

Fix a dangling input pointer in :class:`lzma.LZMADecompressor`,
:class:`bz2.BZ2Decompressor`, and internal :class:`!zlib._ZlibDecompressor`
when memory allocation fails with :exc:`MemoryError`, which could let a
subsequent :meth:`!decompress` call read or write through a stale pointer to
the already-released caller buffer.

..

.. date: 2026-03-31-09-15-51
.. gh-issue: 148169
.. nonce: EZJzz2
.. section: Security

A bypass in :mod:`webbrowser` allowed URLs prefixed with ``%action`` to pass
the dash-prefix safety check.

..

.. date: 2026-03-29-12-51-33
.. gh-issue: 146581
.. nonce: 4vZfB0
.. section: Security

Fix vulnerability in :func:`shutil.unpack_archive` for ZIP files on Windows
which allowed to write files outside of the destination tree if the patch in
the archive contains a Windows drive prefix. Now such invalid paths will be
skipped. Files containing ".." in the name (like "foo..bar") are no longer
skipped.

..

.. date: 2026-03-25-00-51-03
.. gh-issue: 146333
.. nonce: LqdL__bn
.. section: Security

Fix quadratic backtracking in :class:`configparser.RawConfigParser` option
parsing regexes (``OPTCRE`` and ``OPTCRE_NV``). A crafted configuration line
with many whitespace characters could cause excessive CPU usage.

..

.. date: 2026-03-20-09-29-42
.. gh-issue: 146211
.. nonce: PQVbs7
.. section: Security

Reject CR/LF characters in tunnel request headers for the
HTTPConnection.set_tunnel() method.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-21-49-18
.. gh-issue: 150913
.. nonce: EmptyBl
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`sqlite3.Blob` slice assignment to raise :exc:`TypeError` and
:exc:`IndexError` for type and size mismatches respectively, even when the
target slice is empty.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-18-22-56
.. gh-issue: 143008
.. nonce: z5tw-J
.. section: Library

Fix race conditions when re-initializing a :class:`io.TextIOWrapper` object.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-17-47-30
.. gh-issue: 150685
.. nonce: EBB2mU
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 26.1.2

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150406
.. nonce: jF3g63
.. section: Library

Fix a possible crash occurring during :mod:`socket` module initialization
when the system is out of memory on platforms without a reentrant
``gethostbyname``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-07-22-05
.. gh-issue: 150372
.. nonce: 9hLqhe
.. section: Library

:mod:`readline`: Fix a potential crash during tab completion caused by an
out-of-memory error during module initialization.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-11-25-58
.. gh-issue: 150175
.. nonce: 8H4Caz
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :class:`unittest.mock.ThreadingMock` where concurrent
calls could lose increments to ``call_count`` and other attributes due to a
missing lock in ``_increment_mock_call``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-19-19-00-49
.. gh-issue: 84353
.. nonce: ZU5zaQ
.. section: Library

Preserve non-UTF-8 encoded filenames when appending to a
:class:`zipfile.ZipFile`.  Previously, non-ASCII names stored in a legacy
encoding (without the UTF-8 flag bit set) could be corrupted when the
central directory was rewritten: they were decoded as cp437 and then
re-stored as UTF-8.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-07-44-46
.. gh-issue: 149995
.. nonce: vvtFHn
.. section: Library

Update various docstrings in :mod:`typing`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-22-37-02
.. gh-issue: 88726
.. nonce: BAoL6j
.. section: Library

The :mod:`email` package now uses standard MIME charset names "gb2312" and
"big5" instead of non-standard names "eucgb2312_cn" and "big5_tw".

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-02-25-56
.. gh-issue: 149571
.. nonce: LNyuWJ
.. section: Library

Fix the C implementation of :meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.itertext`:
it no longer emits text for comments and processing instructions.

..

.. date: 2026-05-16-21-08-33
.. gh-issue: 149921
.. nonce: I1yNML
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in error paths of the :mod:`!_interpchannels` and
:mod:`!_interpqueues` extension modules.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-23-18-39
.. gh-issue: 149801
.. nonce: S_FfGr
.. section: Library

Add IANA registered names and aliases with leading zeros before number (like
IBM00858, CP00858, IBM01140, CP01140) for corresponding codecs.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-06-24-54
.. gh-issue: 149701
.. nonce: 8v9RTm
.. section: Library

Fix bad return code from Lib/venv/bin/activate if hashing is disabled

..

.. date: 2026-05-08-15-08-35
.. gh-issue: 112821
.. nonce: t9T1YD
.. section: Library

In the REPL, autocompletion might run arbitrary code in the getter of a
descriptor. If that getter raised an exception, autocompletion would fail to
present any options for the entire object.  Autocompletion now works as
expected for these objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-21-58-17
.. gh-issue: 149388
.. nonce: DDBPeA
.. section: Library

Make :class:`!asyncio.windows_utils.PipeHandle` closing idempotent.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-14-18-47
.. gh-issue: 149489
.. nonce: bX9iHe
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`~xml.etree.ElementTree` serialization to HTML. The content of
elements "xmp", "iframe", "noembed", "noframes", and "plaintext" is no
longer escaped. The "plaintext" element no longer have the closing tag.

..

.. date: 2026-05-04-19-28-48
.. gh-issue: 149377
.. nonce: WNlc8Y
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 26.1.1

..

.. date: 2026-05-01-16-45-31
.. gh-issue: 149231
.. nonce: x2nBEE
.. section: Library

In :mod:`tomllib`, the number of parts in TOML keys is now limited.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-16-11-27
.. gh-issue: 149117
.. nonce: yEeTYd
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`runpy.run_module` and :func:`runpy.run_path` to set the
:attr:`~ImportError.name` attribute on the :exc:`ImportError` they raise.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-14-33-42
.. gh-issue: 149148
.. nonce: EaiYvk
.. section: Library

:mod:`ensurepip`: Upgrade bundled pip to 26.1. This version fixes the
:cve:`2026-3219` vulnerability. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-22-34-09
.. gh-issue: 148093
.. nonce: 9pWceM
.. section: Library

Fix an out-of-bounds read of one byte in :func:`binascii.a2b_uu`. Raise
:exc:`binascii.Error`, instead of reading past the buffer end.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-17-12-11
.. gh-issue: 148914
.. nonce: i5C3kW
.. section: Library

Fix memoization of in-band :class:`~pickle.PickleBuffer` in the Python
implementation of :mod:`pickle`. Previously, identical
:class:`!PickleBuffer`\ s did not preserve identity, and empty writable
:class:`!PickleBuffer` memoized an empty bytearray object in place of
``b''``, so the following references to ``b''`` were unpickled as an empty
bytearray object.

..

.. date: 2026-04-25-14-11-24
.. gh-issue: 138907
.. nonce: u21Wnh
.. section: Library

Support :rfc:`9309` in :mod:`urllib.robotparser`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-24-19-54-00
.. gh-issue: 148954
.. nonce: v1
.. section: Library

Fix XML injection vulnerability in :func:`xmlrpc.client.dumps` where the
``methodname`` was not being escaped before interpolation into the XML body.

..

.. date: 2026-04-20-18-29-21
.. gh-issue: 148801
.. nonce: ROeNqs
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.__deepcopy__
<object.__deepcopy__>` on deeply nested trees.

..

.. date: 2026-04-18-21-39-15
.. gh-issue: 148735
.. nonce: siw6DG
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a use-after-free in
:meth:`Element.findtext <xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findtext>` when the
element tree is mutated concurrently during the search.

..

.. date: 2026-04-15-11-00-39
.. gh-issue: 146553
.. nonce: VGOsoP
.. section: Library

Fix infinite loop in :func:`typing.get_type_hints` when ``__wrapped__``
forms a cycle. Patch by Shamil Abdulaev.

..

.. date: 2026-04-14-09-04-35
.. gh-issue: 148508
.. nonce: -GiXml
.. section: Library

An intermittent timing error when running SSL tests on iOS has been
resolved.

..

.. date: 2026-04-13-15-59-44
.. gh-issue: 148518
.. nonce: RQdvsu
.. section: Library

If an email containing an address header that ended in an open double quote
was parsed with a non-``compat32`` policy, accessing the ``username``
attribute of the mailbox accessed through that header object would result in
an ``IndexError``. It now correctly returns an empty string as the result.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-16-40-11
.. gh-issue: 148370
.. nonce: 0Li2EK
.. section: Library

:mod:`configparser`: prevent quadratic behavior when a
:exc:`~configparser.ParsingError` is raised after a parser fails to parse
multiple lines. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-04-09-12-42-42
.. gh-issue: 148254
.. nonce: Xt7vKs
.. section: Library

Use singular "sec" instead of "secs" in :mod:`timeit` verbose output for
consistency with other time units.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-14-13-40
.. gh-issue: 148192
.. nonce: 34AUYQ
.. section: Library

``email.generator.Generator._make_boundary`` could fail to detect a
duplicate boundary string if linesep was not \n. It now correctly detects
boundary strings when linesep is \r\n as well.

..

.. date: 2026-03-22-23-42-22
.. gh-issue: 146313
.. nonce: RtDeAd
.. section: Library

Fix a deadlock in :mod:`multiprocessing`'s resource tracker where the parent
process could hang indefinitely in :func:`os.waitpid` during interpreter
shutdown if a child created via :func:`os.fork` still held the resource
tracker's pipe open.

..

.. date: 2026-03-11-15-09-52
.. gh-issue: 145831
.. nonce: _sW94w
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`!email.quoprimime.decode` leaving a stray ``\r`` when
``eol='\r\n'`` by stripping the full *eol* string instead of one character.

..

.. date: 2026-02-22-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 145105
.. nonce: csv-reader-reentrant
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :mod:`csv` reader when iterating with a re-entrant iterator
that calls :func:`next` on the same reader from within ``__next__``.

..

.. date: 2026-02-19-04-40-57
.. gh-issue: 130750
.. nonce: 0hW52O
.. section: Library

Restore quoting of choices in :mod:`argparse` error messages for improved
clarity and consistency with documentation.

..

.. date: 2026-01-19-21-23-18
.. gh-issue: 105936
.. nonce: dGrzjM
.. section: Library

Attempting to mutate non-field attributes of :mod:`dataclasses` with both
*frozen* and *slots* being ``True`` now raises
:class:`~dataclasses.FrozenInstanceError` instead of :class:`TypeError`.
Their non-dataclass subclasses can now freely mutate non-field attributes,
and the original non-slotted class can be garbage collected. The fix also
handles the case of an empty ``__class__`` cell on a function found within
the class (gh-148947).

..

.. date: 2026-01-11-13-03-32
.. gh-issue: 142516
.. nonce: u7An-s
.. section: Library

:mod:`ssl`: fix reference leaks in :class:`ssl.SSLContext` objects. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-12-17-04-10-35
.. gh-issue: 142831
.. nonce: ee3t4L
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the :mod:`json` module where a use-after-free could occur if
the object being encoded is modified during serialization.

..

.. date: 2025-10-18-12-13-39
.. gh-issue: 140287
.. nonce: 49iU-4
.. section: Library

The :mod:`asyncio` REPL now handles exceptions when executing
:envvar:`PYTHONSTARTUP` scripts. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2025-09-26-18-04-28
.. gh-issue: 90949
.. nonce: YHjSzX
.. section: Library

Add
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionActivationThreshold`
and
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionMaximumAmplification`
to :ref:`xmlparser <xmlparser-objects>` objects to tune protections against
`billion laughs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Billion_laughs_attack>`_
attacks. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-04-17-15-26-35
.. gh-issue: 132631
.. nonce: IDFZfb
.. section: Library

Fix "I/O operation on closed file" when parsing JSON Lines file with
:mod:`JSON CLI <json.tool>`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-13-36-02
.. gh-issue: 128110
.. nonce: 9wx_G0
.. section: Library

Fix bug in the parsing of :mod:`email` address headers that could result in
extraneous spaces in the decoded text when using a modern email policy.
Space between pairs of adjacent :rfc:`2047` encoded-words is now ignored,
per section 6.2 (and consistent with existing parsing of unstructured
headers like *Subject*).

..

.. date: 2024-11-02-02-02-31
.. gh-issue: 107398
.. nonce: uUtA6Q
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tarfile` stream mode exception when process the file with the gzip
extra field.

..

.. date: 2024-09-09-12-48-37
.. gh-issue: 123853
.. nonce: e-zFxb
.. section: Library

Update the table of Windows language code identifiers (LCIDs) used by
:func:`locale.getdefaultlocale` on Windows to protocol version 16.0
(2024-04-23).

..

.. date: 2024-02-10-21-25-22
.. gh-issue: 70039
.. nonce: 6wvcAP
.. section: Library

Fixed bug where :meth:`smtplib.SMTP.starttls` could fail if
:meth:`smtplib.SMTP.connect` is called explicitly rather than implicitly.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-13-10-32
.. gh-issue: 83281
.. nonce: 2Plpcj
.. section: Library

:mod:`email`: improve handling trailing garbage in address lists to avoid
throwing AttributeError in certain edge cases

..

.. date: 2023-02-26-14-07-18
.. gh-issue: 91099
.. nonce: _QPbEL
.. section: Library

:meth:`imaplib.IMAP4.login` now raises exceptions with :class:`str` instead
of :class:`bytes`. Patch by Florian Best.

..

.. bpo: 6699
.. date: 2019-12-12-03-18-02
.. nonce: 1CqJFG
.. section: IDLE

Warn the user if a file will be overwritten when saving.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-17-27-41
.. gh-issue: 150319
.. nonce: ol9tWK
.. section: Documentation

Generic builtin and standard library types now document the meaning of their
type parameters.

..

.. date: 2026-04-17-02-28-55
.. gh-issue: 148663
.. nonce: MHIbRB
.. section: Documentation

Document that :class:`calendar.IllegalMonthError` is a subclass of both
:exc:`ValueError` and :exc:`IndexError` since Python 3.12.

..

.. date: 2026-04-02-07-20-00
.. gh-issue: 146646
.. nonce: GlobDoc1
.. section: Documentation

Document that :func:`glob.glob`, :func:`glob.iglob`,
:meth:`pathlib.Path.glob`, and :meth:`pathlib.Path.rglob` silently suppress
:exc:`OSError` exceptions raised from scanning the filesystem.

..

.. date: 2023-09-16-23-42-27
.. gh-issue: 109503
.. nonce: mZ-kdU
.. section: Documentation

Fix documentation for :func:`shutil.move` on usage of :func:`os.rename`
since nonatomic move might be used even if the files are on the same
filesystem. Patch by Fang Li

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-24-35
.. gh-issue: 151112
.. nonce: 4RKCkD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the compiler that could occur when running out of memory.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-10-28-30
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: DKa6Sl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash, when there's no memory left on a device, which happened in:

- code compilation - :func:`!_winapi.CreateProcess`

Now these places raise proper :exc:`MemoryError` errors.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-20-19-35
.. gh-issue: 150633
.. nonce: XkNul0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the frozen importer accepting module names with embedded null bytes,
which caused it to bypass the :data:`sys.modules` cache and create duplicate
module objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-24-14-45-00
.. gh-issue: 149156
.. nonce: NP73rB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an intermittent crash after :func:`os.fork` when perf trampoline
profiling is enabled and the child returns through trampoline frames
inherited from the parent process.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-22-08-01
.. gh-issue: 149449
.. nonce: 2lhQFF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free crash when the :mod:`unicodedata` module was removed
from :data:`sys.modules` and garbage-collected between calls that decode
``\N{...}`` escapes or use the ``namereplace`` codec error handler.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-09-55-50
.. gh-issue: 148450
.. nonce: 2MEVqH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``abc.register()`` so it invalidates type version tags for registered
classes.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-21-52-38
.. gh-issue: 150207
.. nonce: l2BUtI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a memory allocation fails during tokenizer initialization.
A proper :exc:`MemoryError` is now raised instead.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-17-09-28
.. gh-issue: 150107
.. nonce: GD72-D
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`asyncio`: ``sendfile()`` and ``sock_sendfile()`` event loop methods
now call ``file.seek(offset)`` if *file* has a ``seek()`` method, even if
*offset* is ``0`` (default value).

..

.. date: 2026-05-20-13-06-17
.. gh-issue: 150146
.. nonce: i5m_SL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash on a complex type variable substitution.

``from typing import TypeVar; memoryview[TypeVar("")][*typing.Mapping[...,
...]]`` used to fail due to missing ``NULL`` check on ``_unpack_args`` C
function call.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-13-47-17
.. gh-issue: 149590
.. nonce: IPBeQx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when faulthandler is imported more than once.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-06-54-41
.. gh-issue: 149738
.. nonce: 4BLFoH
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`sqlite3`: Disallow removing ``row_factory`` and ``text_factory``
attributes of a connection to prevent a crash on a query.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-16-47-23
.. gh-issue: 139808
.. nonce: iIs7_E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add branch protections for AArch64 (BTI/PAC) in assembly code used by
:option:`-X perf_jit <-X>` (Linux perf profiler integration).

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-14-36-44
.. gh-issue: 148820
.. nonce: XhOGhA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race in :c:type:`!_PyRawMutex` on the free-threaded build where a
``Py_PARK_INTR`` return from ``_PySemaphore_Wait`` could let the waiter
destroy its semaphore before the unlocking thread's ``_PySemaphore_Wakeup``
completed, causing a fatal ``ReleaseSemaphore`` error.

..

.. date: 2026-04-17-20-37-02
.. gh-issue: 148653
.. nonce: nbbHMh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Forbid :mod:`marshalling <marshal>` recursive code objects which cannot be
correctly unmarshalled.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-17-27-28
.. gh-issue: 148390
.. nonce: MAhw7F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an undefined behavior in :class:`memoryview` when using the native
boolean format (``?``) in :meth:`~memoryview.cast`. Previously, on some
common platforms, calling ``memoryview(b).cast("?").tolist()`` incorrectly
returned ``[False]`` instead of ``[True]`` for any even byte *b*. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-10-40-57
.. gh-issue: 148418
.. nonce: ggA1LZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible reference leak in a corrupted ``TYPE_CODE`` marshal stream.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-20-37-23
.. gh-issue: 148222
.. nonce: uF4D4E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix vectorcall support in :class:`types.GenericAlias` when the underlying
type does not support the vectorcall protocol. Fix possible leaks in
:class:`types.GenericAlias` and :class:`types.UnionType` in case of memory
error.

..

.. date: 2026-02-28-16-46-17
.. gh-issue: 145376
.. nonce: lG5u1a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leaks in various unusual error scenarios.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-14-26-17
.. gh-issue: 150907
.. nonce: CA91_B
.. section: C API

Fix ``dynamic_annotations.h`` header file when built with C++ and Valgrind:
add ``extern "C++" scope`` for the C++ template. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-05-04-06-03-50
.. gh-issue: 149351
.. nonce: hN4sF0
.. section: Build

Avoid possible broken macOS framework install names when DESTDIR is
specified during builds.

..

.. date: 2026-04-30-08-43-47
.. gh-issue: 146475
.. nonce: 1cL4hX
.. section: Build

Block Apple Clang from being used to build the JIT as it ships without
required LLVM tools.

..

.. date: 2026-04-14-15-20-29
.. gh-issue: 148535
.. nonce: JjKiaa
.. section: Build

No longer use the ``gcc -fprofile-update=atomic`` flag on i686. The flag has
been added to fix a random GCC internal error on PGO build (:gh:`145801`)
caused by corruption of profile data (.gcda files). The problem is that it
makes the PGO build way slower (up to 47x slower) on i686. Since the GCC
internal error was not seen on i686 so far, don't use
``-fprofile-update=atomic`` on i686 anymore. Patch by Victor Stinner.
