.. date: 2024-09-04-11-55-29
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: 8P4bmN
.. release date: 2024-09-06
.. section: macOS

Updated macOS installer build to use OpenSSL 3.0.15.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-09-59-18
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: QaMC12
.. section: Windows

Updated Windows build to use OpenSSL 3.0.15.

..

.. date: 2024-08-01-10-55-15
.. gh-issue: 122573
.. nonce: 4-UCFY
.. section: Windows

The Windows build of CPython now requires 3.10 or newer.

..

.. date: 2024-07-19-21-50-54
.. gh-issue: 100256
.. nonce: GDrKba
.. section: Windows

:mod:`mimetypes` no longer fails when it encounters an inaccessible registry
key.

..

.. date: 2022-04-20-18-32-30
.. gh-issue: 79846
.. nonce: Vggv3f
.. section: Windows

Makes :code:`ssl.create_default_context()` ignore invalid certificates in
the Windows certificate store

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-10-07-51
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: 1eIFZb
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update GitHub CI workflows to use OpenSSL 3.0.15 and multissltests to use
3.0.15, 3.1.7, and 3.2.3.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-15-28-08
.. gh-issue: 119727
.. nonce: dVkaZM
.. section: Tests

Add ``--single-process`` command line option to Python test runner
(regrtest). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-05-04-22-56-41
.. gh-issue: 101525
.. nonce: LHK166
.. section: Tests

Skip ``test_gdb`` if the binary is relocated by BOLT. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-12-41-35
.. gh-issue: 123678
.. nonce: N41y9n
.. section: Security

Upgrade libexpat to 2.6.3

..

.. date: 2024-07-02-13-39-20
.. gh-issue: 121285
.. nonce: hrl-yI
.. section: Security

Remove backtracking from tarfile header parsing for ``hdrcharset``, PAX, and
GNU sparse headers.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-18-23-43
.. gh-issue: 123657
.. nonce: Oks4So
.. section: Library

Fix crash and memory leak in :func:`decimal.getcontext`. It crashed when
using a thread-local context by ``--with-decimal-contextvar=no``.

..

.. date: 2024-08-28-20-08-19
.. gh-issue: 123448
.. nonce: tItJlp
.. section: Library

Fixed memory leak of :class:`typing.NoDefault` by moving it to the static
types array.

..

.. date: 2024-08-28-13-03-36
.. gh-issue: 123409
.. nonce: lW0YF-
.. section: Library

Fix :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.reverse_pointer` output according to
:rfc:`RFC 3596, §2.5 <3596#section-2.5>`.  Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-08-26-13-45-20
.. gh-issue: 123270
.. nonce: gXHvNJ
.. section: Library

Applied a more surgical fix for malformed payloads in :class:`zipfile.Path`
causing infinite loops (gh-122905) without breaking contents using
legitimate characters.

..

.. date: 2024-08-24-06-05-41
.. gh-issue: 123228
.. nonce: jR_5O5
.. section: Library

Fix return type for
:func:`!_pyrepl.readline._ReadlineWrapper.get_line_buffer` to be
:func:`str`.  Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-08-24-00-03-01
.. gh-issue: 123240
.. nonce: uFPG3l
.. section: Library

Raise audit events for the :func:`input` in the new REPL.

..

.. date: 2024-08-22-20-10-13
.. gh-issue: 123243
.. nonce: Kifj1L
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in :mod:`!_decimal`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-22-11-25-19
.. gh-issue: 122546
.. nonce: BSmeE7
.. section: Library

Consistently use same file name for different exceptions in the new repl.
Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-08-22-09-37-48
.. gh-issue: 123213
.. nonce: owmXnP
.. section: Library

:meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.extend` and
:class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.Element` assignment no longer hide the
internal exception if an erronous generator is passed. Patch by Bar Harel.

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-18-02-27
.. gh-issue: 85110
.. nonce: 8_iDQy
.. section: Library

Preserve relative path in URL without netloc in
:func:`urllib.parse.urlunsplit` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlunparse`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-16-19-13-21
.. gh-issue: 123067
.. nonce: Nx9O4R
.. section: Library

Fix quadratic complexity in parsing ``"``-quoted cookie values with
backslashes by :mod:`http.cookies`.

..

.. date: 2024-08-14-10-41-11
.. gh-issue: 122981
.. nonce: BHV0Z9
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`inspect.getsource` for generated classes with Python base classes
(e.g. enums).

..

.. date: 2024-08-11-14-23-07
.. gh-issue: 122903
.. nonce: xktZta
.. section: Library

``zipfile.Path.glob`` now correctly matches directories instead of silently
omitting them.

..

.. date: 2024-08-11-14-08-04
.. gh-issue: 122905
.. nonce: 7tDsxA
.. section: Library

:class:`zipfile.Path` objects now sanitize names from the zipfile.

..

.. date: 2024-08-08-15-05-58
.. gh-issue: 122695
.. nonce: f7pwBv
.. section: Library

Fixed double-free when using :func:`gc.get_referents` with a freed
:class:`asyncio.Future` iterator.

..

.. date: 2024-08-07-17-41-16
.. gh-issue: 116263
.. nonce: EcXir0
.. section: Library

:class:`logging.handlers.RotatingFileHandler` no longer rolls over empty log
files.

..

.. date: 2024-08-07-14-12-19
.. gh-issue: 105376
.. nonce: QbGPdE
.. section: Library

Restore the deprecated :mod:`logging` ``warn()`` method. It was removed in
Python 3.13 alpha 1. Keep the deprecated ``warn()`` method in Python 3.13.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-18-07-19
.. gh-issue: 122744
.. nonce: kCzNDI
.. section: Library

Bump the version of pip bundled in ensurepip to version 24.2.

..

.. date: 2024-08-04-14-07-18
.. gh-issue: 118814
.. nonce: uiyks1
.. section: Library

Fix the :class:`typing.TypeVar` constructor when name is passed by keyword.

..

.. date: 2024-07-31-20-43-21
.. gh-issue: 122478
.. nonce: sCU2Le
.. section: Library

Remove internal frames from tracebacks shown in
:class:`code.InteractiveInterpreter` with non-default
:func:`sys.excepthook`. Save correct tracebacks in
:attr:`sys.last_traceback` and update ``__traceback__`` attribute of
:attr:`sys.last_value` and :attr:`sys.last_exc`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-31-15-08-42
.. gh-issue: 116622
.. nonce: aKxIQA
.. section: Library

On Android, the ``FICLONE`` and ``FICLONERANGE`` constants are no longer
exposed by :mod:`fcntl`, as these ioctls are blocked by SELinux.

..

.. date: 2024-07-31-14-55-41
.. gh-issue: 82378
.. nonce: eZvYmR
.. section: Library

Make sure that the new :term:`REPL` interprets :data:`sys.tracebacklimit` in
the same way that the classic REPL did.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-21-29-30
.. gh-issue: 122334
.. nonce: LeoE1x
.. section: Library

Fix crash when importing :mod:`ssl` after the main interpreter restarts.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-14-46-16
.. gh-issue: 87320
.. nonce: -Yk1wb
.. section: Library

In :class:`code.InteractiveInterpreter`, handle exceptions caused by calling
a non-default :func:`sys.excepthook`. Before, the exception bubbled up to
the caller, ending the :term:`REPL`.

..

.. date: 2024-07-27-16-10-41
.. gh-issue: 121650
.. nonce: nf6oc9
.. section: Library

:mod:`email` headers with embedded newlines are now quoted on output. The
:mod:`~email.generator` will now refuse to serialize (write) headers that
are unsafely folded or delimited; see
:attr:`~email.policy.Policy.verify_generated_headers`. (Contributed by Bas
Bloemsaat and Petr Viktorin in :gh:`121650`.)

..

.. date: 2024-07-23-10-59-38
.. gh-issue: 121723
.. nonce: iJEf7e
.. section: Library

Make :func:`logging.config.dictConfig` accept any object implementing the
Queue public API. See the :ref:`queue configuration <configure-queue>`
section for details. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-07-21-10-45-24
.. gh-issue: 122081
.. nonce: dNrYMq
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the :func:`!decimal.IEEEContext` optional function available
via the ``EXTRA_FUNCTIONALITY`` configuration flag.

..

.. date: 2024-07-16-20-49-07
.. gh-issue: 121804
.. nonce: gYN-In
.. section: Library

Correctly show error locations, when :exc:`SyntaxError` raised in new repl.
Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-06-29-15-23-26
.. gh-issue: 121151
.. nonce: HeLEvq
.. section: Library

Fix wrapping of long usage text of arguments inside a mutually exclusive
group in :mod:`argparse`.

..

.. date: 2023-12-12-15-19-58
.. gh-issue: 108172
.. nonce: KyDPuG
.. section: Library

``webbrowser`` honors OS preferred browser on Linux when its desktop entry
name contains the text of a known browser name.

..

.. date: 2023-09-19-17-56-24
.. gh-issue: 109109
.. nonce: WJvvX2
.. section: Library

You can now get the raw TLS certificate chains from TLS connections via
:meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.get_verified_chain` and
:meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.get_unverified_chain` methods.

Contributed by Mateusz Nowak.

..

.. date: 2024-06-16-21-42-45
.. gh-issue: 120083
.. nonce: nczuyv
.. section: IDLE

Add explicit black IDLE Hovertip foreground color needed for recent macOS.
Fixes Sonoma showing unreadable white on pale yellow.  Patch by John
Riggles.

..

.. date: 2024-09-06-19-23-44
.. gh-issue: 120221
.. nonce: giJEDT
.. section: Library

asyncio REPL is now again properly recognizing KeyboardInterrupts. Display
of exceptions raised in secondary threads is fixed.

..

.. date: 2024-09-06-14-13-01
.. gh-issue: 119310
.. nonce: WQxyDF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow the new interactive shell to read history files written with the
editline library that use unicode-escaped entries.  Patch by aorcajo and
Łukasz Langa.

..

.. date: 2024-09-03-13-34-35
.. gh-issue: 123572
.. nonce: uuqoYV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix key mappings for various F-keys in Windows for the new REPL. Patch by
devdanzin

..

.. date: 2024-09-02-17-32-15
.. gh-issue: 119034
.. nonce: HYh5Vj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change ``<page up>`` and ``<page down>`` keys of the Python REPL to history
search forward/backward. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-09-01-00-02-05
.. gh-issue: 123545
.. nonce: 8nQNbL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a double decref in rare cases on experimental JIT builds.

..

.. date: 2024-08-29-19-46-07
.. gh-issue: 123484
.. nonce: rjUn_F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``_Py_DebugOffsets`` for long objects to be relative to the start of the
object rather than the start of a subobject.

..

.. date: 2024-08-27-13-16-40
.. gh-issue: 123344
.. nonce: 56Or78
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add AST optimizations for type parameter defaults.

..

.. date: 2024-08-26-00-58-26
.. gh-issue: 123321
.. nonce: ApxcnE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent Parser/myreadline race condition from segfaulting on multi-threaded
use. Patch by Bar Harel and Amit Wienner.

..

.. date: 2024-08-25-18-27-49
.. gh-issue: 123177
.. nonce: yLuyqE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug causing stray prompts to appear in the middle of wrapped lines in
the new REPL.

..

.. date: 2024-08-25-10-54-22
.. gh-issue: 122982
.. nonce: KLD91q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extend the deprecation period for bool inversion (``~``) by two years.

..

.. date: 2024-08-23-18-31-10
.. gh-issue: 123275
.. nonce: DprIrj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support :option:`-X gil=1 <-X>` and :envvar:`PYTHON_GIL=1 <PYTHON_GIL>` on
non-free-threaded builds.

..

.. date: 2024-08-23-15-59-54
.. gh-issue: 123177
.. nonce: OLcaC5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deactivate line wrap in the Apple Terminal via a ANSI escape code. Patch by
Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-08-23-13-08-27
.. gh-issue: 123229
.. nonce: aHm-dw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix valgrind warning by initializing the f-string buffers to 0 in the
tokenizer. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-08-23-11-26-54
.. gh-issue: 122298
.. nonce: ZMyln4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore printout of GC stats when ``gc.set_debug(gc.DEBUG_STATS)`` is
called. This featue was accidentally removed when implementing incremental
GC.

..

.. date: 2024-08-21-15-22-53
.. gh-issue: 121804
.. nonce: r5K3PS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly show error locations when a :exc:`SyntaxError` is raised in the
basic REPL. Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-12-29-52
.. gh-issue: 123142
.. nonce: 3PXiNb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix too-wide source location in exception tracebacks coming from broken
iterables in comprehensions.

..

.. date: 2024-08-20-11-09-16
.. gh-issue: 123048
.. nonce: 2TISpv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug where pattern matching code could emit a :opcode:`JUMP_FORWARD`
with no source location.

..

.. date: 2024-08-18-18-25-54
.. gh-issue: 123123
.. nonce: 0ZcaEB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix displaying :exc:`SyntaxError` exceptions covering multiple lines. Patch
by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-08-17-17-26-25
.. gh-issue: 123083
.. nonce: 9xWLJ-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential use-after-free in ``STORE_ATTR_WITH_HINT``.

..

.. date: 2024-08-15-19-28-43
.. gh-issue: 123022
.. nonce: m3EF9E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in free-threaded build when calling :c:func:`Py_Initialize` from a
non-main thread.

..

.. date: 2024-08-10-12-44-03
.. gh-issue: 122888
.. nonce: TUyu9r
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash on certain calls to ``str()`` with positional arguments of the
wrong type. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-08-05-19-04-06
.. gh-issue: 116622
.. nonce: 3LWUzE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix Android stdout and stderr messages being truncated or lost.

..

.. date: 2024-08-01-19-13-58
.. gh-issue: 122527
.. nonce: eztso6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash that occurred when a ``PyStructSequence`` was deallocated after
its type's dictionary was cleared by the GC.  The type's
:c:member:`~PyTypeObject.tp_basicsize` now accounts for non-sequence fields
that aren't included in the :c:macro:`Py_SIZE` of the sequence.

..

.. date: 2024-07-30-11-41-35
.. gh-issue: 122445
.. nonce: Rq0bjS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add only fields which are modified via self.* to
:attr:`~type.__static_attributes__`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-19-21-34-21
.. gh-issue: 98442
.. nonce: cqhjkN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix too wide source locations of the cleanup instructions of a with
statement.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-18-29-18
.. gh-issue: 93691
.. nonce: 6OautB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix source locations of instructions generated for with statements.

..

.. date: 2024-06-05-10-32-44
.. gh-issue: 120097
.. nonce: 9S2klk
.. section: Core and Builtins

``FrameLocalsProxy`` now subclasses ``collections.abc.Mapping`` and can be
matched as a mapping in ``match`` statements

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-14-23-11
.. gh-issue: 122728
.. nonce: l-fQ-v
.. section: C API

Fix :c:func:`PyEval_GetLocals` to avoid :exc:`SystemError` ("bad argument to
internal function"). Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-09-04-12-01-43
.. gh-issue: 123418
.. nonce: ynzspB
.. section: Build

Updated Android build to use OpenSSL 3.0.15.

..

.. date: 2024-08-24-19-09-31
.. gh-issue: 123297
.. nonce: fdtXoe
.. section: Build

Propagate the value of ``LDFLAGS`` to ``LDCXXSHARED`` in :mod:`sysconfig`.
Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-08-07-00-20-18
.. gh-issue: 116622
.. nonce: U9cxHM
.. section: Build

Rename build variable ``MODULE_LDFLAGS`` back to ``LIBPYTHON``, as it's used
by package build systems (e.g. Meson).

..

.. date: 2024-08-02-12-59-15
.. gh-issue: 118943
.. nonce: vZQtET
.. section: Build

Fix an issue where the experimental JIT could be built several times by the
``make regen-all`` target, leading to possible race conditions on heavily
parallelized builds.

..

.. date: 2024-06-18-15-28-25
.. gh-issue: 118943
.. nonce: aie7nn
.. section: Build

Fix a possible race condition affecting parallel builds configured with
``--enable-experimental-jit``, in which :exc:`FileNotFoundError` could be
caused by another process already moving ``jit_stencils.h.new`` to
``jit_stencils.h``.
