.. date: 2024-04-04-13-42-59
.. gh-issue: 117494
.. nonce: GPQH64
.. release date: 2024-04-09
.. section: Core and Builtins

Refactored the instruction sequence data structure out of compile.c into
instruction_sequence.c.

..

.. date: 2024-04-03-13-44-04
.. gh-issue: 116968
.. nonce: zgcdG2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Introduce a unified 16-bit backoff counter type (``_Py_BackoffCounter``),
shared between the Tier 1 adaptive specializer and the Tier 2 optimizer. The
API used for adaptive specialization counters is changed but the behavior is
(supposed to be) identical.

The behavior of the Tier 2 counters is changed:

* There are no longer dynamic thresholds (we never varied these).
* All counters now use the same exponential backoff.
* The counter for ``JUMP_BACKWARD`` starts counting down from 16.
* The ``temperature`` in side exits starts counting down from 64.

..

.. date: 2024-04-03-09-49-15
.. gh-issue: 117431
.. nonce: WAqRgc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the performance of the following :class:`bytes` and
:class:`bytearray` methods by adapting them to the :c:macro:`METH_FASTCALL`
calling convention:

* :meth:`!endswith`
* :meth:`!startswith`

..

.. date: 2024-04-02-17-37-35
.. gh-issue: 117431
.. nonce: vDKAOn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the performance of the following :class:`str` methods by adapting
them to the :c:macro:`METH_FASTCALL` calling convention:

* :meth:`~str.count`
* :meth:`~str.endswith`
* :meth:`~str.find`
* :meth:`~str.index`
* :meth:`~str.rfind`
* :meth:`~str.rindex`
* :meth:`~str.startswith`

..

.. date: 2024-04-02-10-04-57
.. gh-issue: 117411
.. nonce: YdyVmG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Move ``PyFutureFeatures`` to an internal header and make it private.

..

.. date: 2024-04-02-06-16-49
.. gh-issue: 109120
.. nonce: X485oN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added handle of incorrect star expressions, e.g ``f(3, *)``. Patch by
Grigoryev Semyon

..

.. date: 2024-03-26-17-22-38
.. gh-issue: 117266
.. nonce: Kwh79O
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crashes for certain user-created subclasses of :class:`ast.AST`. Such
classes are now expected to set the ``_field_types`` attribute.

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-17-04-54
.. gh-issue: 99108
.. nonce: 8bjdO6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Updated the :mod:`hashlib` built-in `HACL\* project`_ C code from upstream
that we use for many implementations when they are not present via OpenSSL
in a given build.  This also avoids the rare potential for a C symbol name
one definition rule linking issue.

.. _HACL\* project: https://github.com/hacl-star/hacl-star

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-12-51-12
.. gh-issue: 117108
.. nonce: tNqDEo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the old space bit of objects in the young generation from 0 to
gcstate->visited, so that any objects created during GC will have the old
bit set correctly if they get moved into the old generation.

..

.. date: 2024-03-21-12-10-11
.. gh-issue: 117108
.. nonce: _6jIrB
.. section: Core and Builtins

The cycle GC now chooses the size of increments based on the total heap
size, instead of the rate of object creation. This ensures that it can keep
up with growing heaps.

..

.. date: 2024-03-13-16-55-25
.. gh-issue: 116735
.. nonce: o3w6y8
.. section: Core and Builtins

For ``INSTRUMENTED_CALL_FUNCTION_EX``, set ``arg0`` to
``sys.monitoring.MISSING`` instead of ``None`` for :monitoring-event:`CALL`
event.

..

.. date: 2024-03-12-20-31-57
.. gh-issue: 113964
.. nonce: bJppzg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Starting new threads and process creation through :func:`os.fork` are now
only prevented once all non-daemon threads exit.

..

.. date: 2024-03-11-22-05-56
.. gh-issue: 116626
.. nonce: GsyczB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure ``INSTRUMENTED_CALL_FUNCTION_EX`` always emits
:monitoring-event:`CALL`

..

.. date: 2024-03-11-00-45-39
.. gh-issue: 116554
.. nonce: gYumG5
.. section: Core and Builtins

``list.sort()`` now exploits more cases of partial ordering, particularly
those with long descending runs with sub-runs of equal values. Those are
recognized as single runs now (previously, each block of repeated values
caused a new run to be created).

..

.. date: 2024-03-07-16-12-39
.. gh-issue: 114099
.. nonce: ujdjn2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added a Loader that can discover extension modules in an iOS-style
Frameworks folder.

..

.. date: 2024-02-25-14-17-25
.. gh-issue: 115775
.. nonce: CNbGbJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compiler populates the new ``__static_attributes__`` field on a class with
the names of attributes of this class which are accessed through self.X from
any function in its body.

..

.. date: 2024-02-24-03-39-09
.. gh-issue: 115776
.. nonce: THJXqg
.. section: Core and Builtins

The array of values, the ``PyDictValues`` struct is now embedded in the
object during allocation. This provides better performance in the common
case, and does not degrade as much when the object's ``__dict__`` is
materialized.

..

.. date: 2024-01-07-04-22-51
.. gh-issue: 108362
.. nonce: oB9Gcf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement an incremental cyclic garbage collector. By collecting the old
generation in increments, there is no need for a full heap scan. This can
hugely reduce maximum pause time for programs with large heaps.

Reduce the number of generations from three to two. The old generation is
split into two spaces, "visited" and "pending".

Collection happens in two steps:: * An increment is formed from the young
generation and a small part of the pending space. * This increment is
scanned and the survivors moved to the end of the visited space.

When the collecting space becomes empty, the two spaces are swapped.

..

.. date: 2023-10-14-00-05-17
.. gh-issue: 109870
.. nonce: oKpJ3P
.. section: Core and Builtins

Dataclasses now calls :func:`exec` once per dataclass, instead of once per
method being added.  This can speed up dataclass creation by up to 20%.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-09-33-48
.. gh-issue: 97901
.. nonce: BOLluU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Mime type ``text/rtf`` is now supported by :mod:`mimetypes`.

..

.. bpo: 24612
.. date: 2021-09-04-22-33-01
.. nonce: SsTuUX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the :exc:`SyntaxError` that happens when 'not' appears after an
operator. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-04-08-20-26-15
.. gh-issue: 117648
.. nonce: NzVEa7
.. section: Library

Improve performance of :func:`os.path.join` and :func:`os.path.expanduser`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-06-16-42-34
.. gh-issue: 117584
.. nonce: hqk9Hn
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`TypeError` for non-paths in :func:`posixpath.relpath`.

..

.. date: 2024-04-03-18-36-53
.. gh-issue: 117467
.. nonce: l6rWlj
.. section: Library

Preserve mailbox ownership when rewriting in :func:`mailbox.mbox.flush`.
Patch by Tony Mountifield.

..

.. date: 2024-04-02-20-30-12
.. gh-issue: 114848
.. nonce: YX4pEc
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`FileNotFoundError` when ``getcwd()`` returns '(unreachable)',
which can happen on Linux >= 2.6.36 with glibc < 2.27.

..

.. date: 2024-04-02-13-13-46
.. gh-issue: 117459
.. nonce: jiIZmH
.. section: Library

:meth:`asyncio.asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe` now keeps the traceback of
:class:`CancelledError`, :class:`TimeoutError` and
:class:`InvalidStateError` which are raised in the coroutine.

..

.. date: 2024-03-29-21-43-19
.. gh-issue: 117381
.. nonce: fT0JFM
.. section: Library

Fix error message for :func:`ntpath.commonpath`.

..

.. date: 2024-03-29-15-58-01
.. gh-issue: 117337
.. nonce: 7w3Qwp
.. section: Library

Deprecate undocumented :func:`!glob.glob0` and :func:`!glob.glob1`
functions. Use :func:`glob.glob` and pass a directory to its *root_dir*
argument instead.

..

.. date: 2024-03-29-15-04-13
.. gh-issue: 117349
.. nonce: OB9kQQ
.. section: Library

Optimise several functions in :mod:`os.path`.

..

.. date: 2024-03-29-12-07-26
.. gh-issue: 117348
.. nonce: WjCYvK
.. section: Library

Refactored :meth:`configparser.RawConfigParser._read` to reduce cyclometric
complexity and improve comprehensibility.

..

.. date: 2024-03-28-19-13-20
.. gh-issue: 117335
.. nonce: d6uKJu
.. section: Library

Raise TypeError for non-sequences for :func:`ntpath.commonpath`.

..

.. date: 2024-03-28-17-55-22
.. gh-issue: 66449
.. nonce: 4jhuEV
.. section: Library

:class:`configparser.ConfigParser` now accepts unnamed sections before named
ones, if configured to do so.

..

.. date: 2024-03-28-13-54-20
.. gh-issue: 88014
.. nonce: zJz31I
.. section: Library

In documentation of :class:`gzip.GzipFile` in module gzip, explain data type
of optional constructor argument *mtime*, and recommend ``mtime = 0`` for
generating deterministic streams.

..

.. date: 2024-03-27-21-05-52
.. gh-issue: 117310
.. nonce: Bt2wox
.. section: Library

Fixed an unlikely early & extra ``Py_DECREF`` triggered crash in :mod:`ssl`
when creating a new ``_ssl._SSLContext`` if CPython was built implausibly
such that the default cipher list is empty **or** the SSL library it was
linked against reports a failure from its C ``SSL_CTX_set_cipher_list()``
API.

..

.. date: 2024-03-27-16-43-42
.. gh-issue: 117294
.. nonce: wbXNFv
.. section: Library

A ``DocTestCase`` now reports as skipped if all examples in the doctest are
skipped.

..

.. date: 2024-03-26-11-48-39
.. gh-issue: 98966
.. nonce: SayV9y
.. section: Library

In :mod:`subprocess`, raise a more informative message when
``stdout=STDOUT``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-21-15-56
.. gh-issue: 117225
.. nonce: oOaZXb
.. section: Library

doctest: only print "and X failed" when non-zero, don't pluralise "1 items".
Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-00-20-16
.. gh-issue: 117205
.. nonce: yV7xGb
.. section: Library

Speed up :func:`compileall.compile_dir` by 20% when using multiprocessing by
increasing ``chunksize``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-23-14-26-18
.. gh-issue: 117178
.. nonce: vTisTG
.. section: Library

Fix regression in lazy loading of self-referential modules, introduced in
gh-114781.

..

.. date: 2024-03-23-13-40-13
.. gh-issue: 112383
.. nonce: XuHf3G
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`dis` module's handling of ``ENTER_EXECUTOR`` instructions.

..

.. date: 2024-03-23-12-28-05
.. gh-issue: 117182
.. nonce: a0KANW
.. section: Library

Lazy-loading of modules that modify their own ``__class__`` no longer
reverts the ``__class__`` to :class:`types.ModuleType`.

..

.. date: 2024-03-21-17-07-38
.. gh-issue: 117084
.. nonce: w1mTpT
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`zipfile` extraction for directory entries with the name containing
backslashes on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-03-21-09-57-57
.. gh-issue: 117114
.. nonce: Qu-p55
.. section: Library

Make :func:`os.path.isdevdrive` available on all platforms. For those that
do not offer Dev Drives, it will always return ``False``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-21-07-27-36
.. gh-issue: 117110
.. nonce: 9K1InX
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that prevents subclasses of :class:`typing.Any` to be instantiated
with arguments. Patch by Chris Fu.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-23-07-58
.. gh-issue: 109653
.. nonce: uu3lrX
.. section: Library

Deferred select imports in importlib.metadata and importlib.resources for a
14% speedup.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-16-10-29
.. gh-issue: 70647
.. nonce: FpD6Ar
.. section: Library

Start the deprecation period for the current behavior of
:func:`datetime.datetime.strptime` and :func:`time.strptime` which always
fails to parse a date string with a :exc:`ValueError` involving a day of
month such as ``strptime("02-29", "%m-%d")`` when a year is **not**
specified and the date happen to be February 29th.  This should help avoid
users finding new bugs every four years due to a natural mistaken assumption
about the API when parsing partial date values.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-19-42-25
.. gh-issue: 116987
.. nonce: ZVKUH1
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`inspect.findsource` for class code objects.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-14-35-57
.. gh-issue: 114099
.. nonce: siNSpK
.. section: Library

Modify standard library to allow for iOS platform differences.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-11-08-26
.. gh-issue: 90872
.. nonce: ghys95
.. section: Library

On Windows, :meth:`subprocess.Popen.wait` no longer calls
``WaitForSingleObject()`` with a negative timeout: pass ``0`` ms if the
timeout is negative. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-18-14-36-50
.. gh-issue: 116957
.. nonce: dTCs4f
.. section: Library

configparser: Don't leave ConfigParser values in an invalid state (stored as
a list instead of a str) after an earlier read raised DuplicateSectionError
or DuplicateOptionError.

..

.. date: 2024-03-17-18-12-39
.. gh-issue: 115538
.. nonce: PBiRQB
.. section: Library

:class:`!_io.WindowsConsoleIO` now emit a warning if a boolean value is
passed as a filedescriptor argument.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-20-59-28
.. gh-issue: 90095
.. nonce: 7UaJ1U
.. section: Library

Ignore empty lines and comments in ``.pdbrc``

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-17-24-59
.. gh-issue: 106531
.. nonce: 9ehywi
.. section: Library

Refreshed zipfile._path from `zipp 3.18
<https://zipp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/history.html#v3-18-0>`_, providing
better compatibility for PyPy, better glob performance for deeply nested
zipfiles, and providing internal access to ``CompleteDirs.inject`` for use
in other tests (like importlib.resources).

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-17-21-25
.. gh-issue: 63207
.. nonce: LV16SL
.. section: Library

On Windows, :func:`time.time` now uses the
``GetSystemTimePreciseAsFileTime()`` clock to have a resolution better than
1 us, instead of the ``GetSystemTimeAsFileTime()`` clock which has a
resolution of 15.6 ms. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-14-01-46
.. gh-issue: 116764
.. nonce: moB3Lc
.. section: Library

Restore support of ``None`` and other false values in :mod:`urllib.parse`
functions :func:`~urllib.parse.parse_qs` and
:func:`~urllib.parse.parse_qsl`. Also, they now raise a TypeError for
non-zero integers and non-empty sequences.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-10-01-23
.. gh-issue: 116811
.. nonce: _h5iKP
.. section: Library

In ``PathFinder.invalidate_caches``, delegate to
``MetadataPathFinder.invalidate_caches``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-09-38-51
.. gh-issue: 116647
.. nonce: h0d_zj
.. section: Library

Fix recursive child in dataclasses

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-01-38-44
.. gh-issue: 113171
.. nonce: VFnObz
.. section: Library

Fixed various false positives and false negatives in

* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_private` (see these docs for details)
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv4Address.is_global`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_private`
* :attr:`ipaddress.IPv6Address.is_global`

Also in the corresponding :class:`ipaddress.IPv4Network` and
:class:`ipaddress.IPv6Network` attributes.

..

.. date: 2024-03-13-15-45-54
.. gh-issue: 63283
.. nonce: OToJnG
.. section: Library

In :mod:`encodings.idna`, any capitalization of the ACE prefix
(``xn--``) is now acceptable. Patch by Pepijn de Vos and Zackery Spytz.

..

.. date: 2024-03-12-19-32-17
.. gh-issue: 71042
.. nonce: oI0Ron
.. section: Library

Add :func:`platform.android_ver`, which provides device and OS information
on Android.

..

.. date: 2024-03-12-17-53-14
.. gh-issue: 73468
.. nonce: z4ZzvJ
.. section: Library

Added new :func:`math.fma` function, wrapping C99's ``fma()`` operation:
fused multiply-add function. Patch by Mark Dickinson and Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-11-17-04-55
.. gh-issue: 116608
.. nonce: 30f58-
.. section: Library

The :mod:`importlib.resources` functions
:func:`~importlib.resources.is_resource`,
:func:`~importlib.resources.open_binary`,
:func:`~importlib.resources.open_text`,
:func:`~importlib.resources.path`,
:func:`~importlib.resources.read_binary`, and
:func:`~importlib.resources.read_text` are un-deprecated, and support
subdirectories via multiple positional arguments. The
:func:`~importlib.resources.contents` function also allows subdirectories,
but remains deprecated.

..

.. date: 2024-03-08-11-31-49
.. gh-issue: 116484
.. nonce: VMAsU7
.. section: Library

Change automatically generated :class:`tkinter.Checkbutton` widget names to
avoid collisions with automatically generated
:class:`tkinter.ttk.Checkbutton` widget names within the same parent widget.

..

.. date: 2024-03-07-11-10-27
.. gh-issue: 114314
.. nonce: iEhAMH
.. section: Library

In :mod:`ctypes`, ctype data is now stored in type objects directly rather
than in a dict subclass. This is an internal change that should not affect
usage.

..

.. date: 2024-03-06-18-30-37
.. gh-issue: 116401
.. nonce: 3Wcda2
.. section: Library

Fix blocking :func:`os.fwalk` and :func:`shutil.rmtree` on opening named
pipe.

..

.. date: 2024-03-05-19-56-29
.. gh-issue: 71052
.. nonce: PMDK--
.. section: Library

Implement :func:`ctypes.util.find_library` on Android.

..

.. date: 2024-03-01-20-23-57
.. gh-issue: 90535
.. nonce: wXm-jC
.. section: Library

Fix support of *interval* values > 1 in
:class:`logging.TimedRotatingFileHandler` for ``when='MIDNIGHT'`` and
``when='Wx'``.

..

.. date: 2024-02-26-10-06-50
.. gh-issue: 113308
.. nonce: MbvOFt
.. section: Library

Remove some internal protected parts from :mod:`uuid`:
``_has_uuid_generate_time_safe``, ``_netbios_getnode``,
``_ipconfig_getnode``, and ``_load_system_functions``. They were unused.

..

.. date: 2024-02-18-09-50-31
.. gh-issue: 115627
.. nonce: HGchj0
.. section: Library

Fix the :mod:`ssl` module error handling of connection terminate by peer. It
now throws an OSError with the appropriate error code instead of an
EOFError.

..

.. date: 2024-02-01-08-09-20
.. gh-issue: 114847
.. nonce: -JrWrR
.. section: Library

Speed up :func:`os.path.realpath` on non-Windows platforms.

..

.. date: 2024-02-01-03-09-38
.. gh-issue: 114271
.. nonce: raCkt5
.. section: Library

Fix a race in ``threading.Thread.join()``.

``threading._MainThread`` now always represents the main thread of the main
interpreter.

``PyThreadState.on_delete`` and ``PyThreadState.on_delete_data`` have been
removed.

..

.. date: 2024-01-22-15-50-58
.. gh-issue: 113538
.. nonce: v2wrwg
.. section: Library

Add :meth:`asyncio.Server.close_clients` and
:meth:`asyncio.Server.abort_clients` methods which allow to more forcefully
close an asyncio server.

..

.. date: 2024-01-02-22-47-12
.. gh-issue: 85287
.. nonce: ZC5DLj
.. section: Library

Changes Unicode codecs to return UnicodeEncodeError or UnicodeDecodeError,
rather than just UnicodeError.

..

.. date: 2023-12-28-22-52-45
.. gh-issue: 113548
.. nonce: j6TJ7O
.. section: Library

:mod:`pdb` now allows CLI arguments to ``pdb -m``.

..

.. date: 2023-12-11-00-51-51
.. gh-issue: 112948
.. nonce: k-OKp5
.. section: Library

Make completion of :mod:`pdb` similar to Python REPL

..

.. date: 2023-06-16-19-17-06
.. gh-issue: 105866
.. nonce: 0NBveV
.. section: Library

Fixed ``_get_slots`` bug which caused error when defining dataclasses with
slots and a weakref_slot.

..

.. date: 2023-05-06-05-00-42
.. gh-issue: 96471
.. nonce: S3X5I-
.. section: Library

Add :py:class:`asyncio.Queue` termination with
:py:meth:`~asyncio.Queue.shutdown` method.

..

.. date: 2022-06-22-14-45-32
.. gh-issue: 89739
.. nonce: CqZcRL
.. section: Library

The :mod:`zipimport` module can now read ZIP64 files.

..

.. bpo: 33533
.. date: 2020-10-02-17-35-19
.. nonce: GLIhM5
.. section: Library

:func:`asyncio.as_completed` now returns an object that is both an
asynchronous iterator and plain iterator. The new asynchronous iteration
pattern allows for easier correlation between prior tasks and their
completed results. This is a closer match to
:func:`concurrent.futures.as_completed`'s iteration pattern. Patch by Justin
Arthur.

..

.. bpo: 27578
.. date: 2020-06-11-16-20-33
.. nonce: CIA-fu
.. section: Library

:func:`inspect.getsource` (and related functions) work with empty module
files, returning ``'\n'`` (or reasonable equivalent) instead of raising
``OSError``. Patch by Kernc.

..

.. bpo: 37141
.. date: 2019-09-26-17-52-52
.. nonce: onYY2-
.. section: Library

Accept an iterable of separators in :meth:`asyncio.StreamReader.readuntil`,
stopping when one of them is encountered.

..

.. date: 2019-08-27-01-03-26
.. gh-issue: 66543
.. nonce: _TRpYr
.. section: Library

Make :func:`mimetypes.guess_type` properly parsing of URLs with only a host
name, URLs containing fragment or query, and filenames with only a UNC
sharepoint on Windows. Based on patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 15010
.. date: 2019-08-12-19-08-06
.. nonce: 3bY2CF
.. section: Library

:meth:`unittest.TestLoader.discover` now saves the original value of
``unittest.TestLoader._top_level_dir`` and restores it at the end of the
call.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-15-12-37
.. gh-issue: 115977
.. nonce: IMLi6K
.. section: Documentation

Remove compatibility references to Emscripten.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-12-41-47
.. gh-issue: 114099
.. nonce: ad_Ck9
.. section: Documentation

Add an iOS platform guide, and flag modules not available on iOS.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-13-15-23
.. gh-issue: 91565
.. nonce: OznXwC
.. section: Documentation

Changes to documentation files and config outputs to reflect the new
location for reporting bugs - i.e. GitHub rather than bugs.python.org.

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-21-31-49
.. gh-issue: 83434
.. nonce: U7Z8cY
.. section: Tests

Disable JUnit XML output (``--junit-xml=FILE`` command line option) in
regrtest when hunting for reference leaks (``-R`` option). Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-24-23-49-25
.. gh-issue: 117187
.. nonce: eMLT5n
.. section: Tests

Fix XML tests for vanilla Expat <2.6.0.

..

.. date: 2024-03-21-11-32-29
.. gh-issue: 116333
.. nonce: F-9Ram
.. section: Tests

Tests of TLS related things (error codes, etc) were updated to be more
lenient about specific error message strings and behaviors as seen in the
BoringSSL and AWS-LC forks of OpenSSL.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-14-19-32
.. gh-issue: 117089
.. nonce: WwR1Z1
.. section: Tests

Consolidated tests for importlib.metadata in their own ``metadata`` package.

..

.. date: 2024-03-13-12-06-49
.. gh-issue: 115979
.. nonce: zsNpQD
.. section: Tests

Update test_importlib so that it passes under WASI SDK 21.

..

.. date: 2024-03-11-23-20-28
.. gh-issue: 112536
.. nonce: Qv1RrX
.. section: Tests

Add --tsan to test.regrtest for running TSAN tests in reasonable execution
times. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2024-03-06-11-00-36
.. gh-issue: 116307
.. nonce: Uij0t_
.. section: Tests

Added import helper ``isolated_modules`` as ``CleanImport`` does not remove
modules imported during the context. Use it in importlib.resources tests to
avoid leaving ``mod`` around to impede importlib.metadata tests.

..

.. date: 2024-03-13-16-16-43
.. gh-issue: 114736
.. nonce: ZhmauG
.. section: Build

Have WASI builds use WASI SDK 21.

..

.. date: 2024-03-08-17-05-15
.. gh-issue: 115983
.. nonce: ZQqk0Q
.. section: Build

Skip building test modules that must be built as shared under WASI.

..

.. date: 2024-03-06-17-26-55
.. gh-issue: 71052
.. nonce: vLbu9u
.. section: Build

Add Android build script and instructions.

..

.. date: 2024-03-28-22-12-00
.. gh-issue: 117267
.. nonce: K_tki1
.. section: Windows

Ensure ``DirEntry.stat().st_ctime`` behaves consistently with
:func:`os.stat` during the deprecation period of ``st_ctime`` by containing
the same value as ``st_birthtime``. After the deprecation period,
``st_ctime`` will be the metadata change time (or unavailable through
``DirEntry``), and only ``st_birthtime`` will contain the creation time.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-20-46-23
.. gh-issue: 116195
.. nonce: Cu_rYs
.. section: Windows

Improves performance of :func:`os.getppid` by using an alternate system API
when available. Contributed by vxiiduu.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-09-14-21
.. gh-issue: 88494
.. nonce: Bwfmp7
.. section: Windows

On Windows, :func:`time.monotonic` now uses the
``QueryPerformanceCounter()`` clock to have a resolution better than 1 us,
instead of the ``GetTickCount64()`` clock which has a resolution of 15.6 ms.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-01-58-22
.. gh-issue: 116773
.. nonce: H2UldY
.. section: Windows

Fix instances of ``<_overlapped.Overlapped object at 0xXXX> still has
pending operation at deallocation, the process may crash``.

..

.. date: 2024-02-24-23-03-43
.. gh-issue: 91227
.. nonce: sL4zWC
.. section: Windows

Fix the asyncio ProactorEventLoop implementation so that sending a datagram
to an address that is not listening does not prevent receiving any more
datagrams.

..

.. date: 2024-02-08-14-48-15
.. gh-issue: 115119
.. nonce: qMt32O
.. section: Windows

Switched from vendored ``libmpdecimal`` code to a separately-hosted external
package in the ``cpython-source-deps`` repository when building the
``_decimal`` module.

..

.. date: 2024-04-08-18-53-33
.. gh-issue: 117642
.. nonce: _-tYH_
.. section: C API

Fix :pep:`737` implementation for ``%#T`` and ``%#N``.

..

.. date: 2024-03-22-19-29-24
.. gh-issue: 87193
.. nonce: u7O-jY
.. section: C API

:c:func:`_PyBytes_Resize` can now be called for bytes objects with reference
count > 1, including 1-byte bytes objects. It creates a new bytes object and
destroys the old one if it has reference count > 1.

..

.. date: 2024-03-20-13-13-22
.. gh-issue: 117021
.. nonce: 0Q5jBx
.. section: C API

Fix integer overflow in :c:func:`PyLong_AsPid` on non-Windows 64-bit
platforms.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-09-49-04
.. gh-issue: 115756
.. nonce: 4Ls_Tl
.. section: C API

:c:func:`!PyCode_GetFirstFree` is an ustable API now and has been renamed to
:c:func:`PyUnstable_Code_GetFirstFree`. (Contributed by Bogdan Romanyuk in
:gh:`115781`)

..

.. date: 2024-03-18-10-58-47
.. gh-issue: 116869
.. nonce: lN0GBl
.. section: C API

Add ``test_cext`` test: build a C extension to check if the Python C API
emits C compiler warnings. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-18-09-58-46
.. gh-issue: 116869
.. nonce: LFDVKM
.. section: C API

Make the C API compatible with ``-Werror=declaration-after-statement``
compiler flag again. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-17-22-42-21
.. gh-issue: 116936
.. nonce: tNrzfm
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyType_GetModuleByDef` to the limited C API. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-16-12-21-00
.. gh-issue: 116809
.. nonce: JL786L
.. section: C API

Restore removed private ``_PyErr_ChainExceptions1()`` function. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-15-23-57-33
.. gh-issue: 115754
.. nonce: zLdv82
.. section: C API

In the limited C API version 3.13, getting ``Py_None``, ``Py_False``,
``Py_True``, ``Py_Ellipsis`` and ``Py_NotImplemented`` singletons is now
implemented as function calls at the stable ABI level to hide implementation
details. Getting these constants still return borrowed references. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-15-23-55-24
.. gh-issue: 115754
.. nonce: xnzc__
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`Py_GetConstant` and :c:func:`Py_GetConstantBorrowed` functions
to get constants. For example, ``Py_GetConstant(Py_CONSTANT_ZERO)`` returns
a :term:`strong reference` to the constant zero. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-22-30-07
.. gh-issue: 111696
.. nonce: 76UMKi
.. section: C API

Add support for ``%T``, ``%T#``, ``%N`` and ``%N#`` formats to
:c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat`: format the fully qualified name of an object
type and of a type: call :c:func:`PyType_GetModuleName`. See :pep:`737` for
more information. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-18-00-32
.. gh-issue: 111696
.. nonce: L6oIPq
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyType_GetModuleName` function to get the type's module name.
Equivalent to getting the ``type.__module__`` attribute. Patch by Eric Snow
and Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-15-17-11
.. gh-issue: 111696
.. nonce: YmnvAi
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyType_GetFullyQualifiedName` function to get the type's fully
qualified name. Equivalent to ``f"{type.__module__}.{type.__qualname__}"``,
or ``type.__qualname__`` if ``type.__module__`` is not a string or is equal
to ``"builtins"``. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-03-14-10-33-58
.. gh-issue: 85283
.. nonce: LOgmdU
.. section: C API

The ``fcntl``, ``grp``, ``pwd``, ``termios``, ``_statistics`` and
``_testconsole`` C extensions are now built with the :ref:`limited C API
<limited-c-api>`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-02-28-15-50-01
.. gh-issue: 111140
.. nonce: mpwcUg
.. section: C API

Add additional flags to :c:func:`PyLong_AsNativeBytes` and
:c:func:`PyLong_FromNativeBytes` to allow the caller to determine how to
handle edge cases around values that fill the entire buffer.

..

.. date: 2023-12-12-19-48-31
.. gh-issue: 113024
.. nonce: rXcQs7
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PyObject_GenericHash` function.
