.. date: 2024-05-08-21-59-38
.. gh-issue: 118773
.. nonce: 7dFRJY
.. release date: 2024-06-05
.. section: Security

Fixes creation of ACLs in :func:`os.mkdir` on Windows to work correctly on
non-English machines.

..

.. date: 2024-05-01-20-57-09
.. gh-issue: 118486
.. nonce: K44KJG
.. section: Security

:func:`os.mkdir` on Windows now accepts *mode* of ``0o700`` to restrict the
new directory to the current user. This fixes :cve:`2024-4030` affecting
:func:`tempfile.mkdtemp` in scenarios where the base temporary directory is
more permissive than the default.

..

.. date: 2024-06-03-13-25-04
.. gh-issue: 119724
.. nonce: EH1dkA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reverted improvements to error messages for ``elif``/``else`` statements not
matching any valid statements, which made in hard to locate the syntax
errors inside those ``elif``/``else`` blocks.

..

.. date: 2024-05-31-12-06-11
.. gh-issue: 119842
.. nonce: tCGVsv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Honor :c:func:`PyOS_InputHook` in the new REPL. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-23-01-00
.. gh-issue: 119821
.. nonce: jPGfvt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix execution of :ref:`annotation scopes <annotation-scopes>` within classes
when ``globals`` is set to a non-dict. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-16-45-27
.. gh-issue: 119548
.. nonce: pqF9Y6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a ``clear`` command to the REPL. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-13-51-48
.. gh-issue: 111999
.. nonce: L0q1gh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the signature of :meth:`str.format_map`.

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-12-52-25
.. gh-issue: 119560
.. nonce: wSlm8q
.. section: Core and Builtins

An invalid assert in beta 1 has been removed.  The assert would fail if
``PyState_FindModule()`` was used in an extension module's init function
before the module def had been initialized.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-21-16-52
.. gh-issue: 119369
.. nonce: qBThho
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix deadlock during thread deletion in free-threaded build, which could
occur when the GIL was enabled at runtime.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-21-04-00
.. gh-issue: 119525
.. nonce: zLFLf1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix deadlock involving ``_PyType_Lookup()`` cache in the free-threaded build
when the GIL is dynamically enabled at runtime.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-06-34-45
.. gh-issue: 119311
.. nonce: 2DBwKR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where names are unexpectedly mangled in the bases of generic
classes.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-06-34-14
.. gh-issue: 119395
.. nonce: z-Hsqb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where names appearing after a generic class are mangled as if they
are in the generic class.

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-11-27-14
.. gh-issue: 119213
.. nonce: nxjxrt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Non-builtin modules built with argument clinic were crashing if used in a
subinterpreter before the main interpreter.  The objects that were causing
the problem by leaking between interpreters carelessly have been fixed.

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-09-46-51
.. gh-issue: 119011
.. nonce: WOe3bu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes ``type.__type_params__`` to return an empty tuple instead of a
descriptor.

..

.. date: 2024-05-20-14-57-39
.. gh-issue: 118692
.. nonce: Qadm7F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid creating unnecessary :exc:`StopIteration` instances for monitoring.

..

.. date: 2024-05-16-23-02-03
.. gh-issue: 119049
.. nonce: qpd_S-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix displaying the source line for warnings created by the C API if the
:mod:`warnings` module had not yet been imported.

..

.. date: 2024-05-11-21-44-17
.. gh-issue: 118844
.. nonce: q2H_km
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix build failures when configuring with both ``--disable-gil`` and
``--enable-experimental-jit``.

..

.. date: 2024-05-10-19-54-18
.. gh-issue: 118921
.. nonce: O4ztZG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add ``copy()`` method for ``FrameLocalsProxy`` which returns a snapshot
``dict`` for local variables.

..

.. date: 2024-05-09-19-47-12
.. gh-issue: 117657
.. nonce: Vn0Yey
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix data races on the field that stores a pointer to the interpreter's main
thread that occur in free-threaded builds.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-18-33-07
.. gh-issue: 118507
.. nonce: OCQsAY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speedup :func:`os.path.isjunction` and :func:`os.path.lexists` on Windows
with a native implementation.

..

.. date: 2024-05-07-16-57-56
.. gh-issue: 118561
.. nonce: wNMKVd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix race condition in free-threaded build where :meth:`!list.extend` could
expose uninitialised memory to concurrent readers.

..

.. date: 2024-04-28-19-51-00
.. gh-issue: 118263
.. nonce: Gaap3S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed up :func:`os.path.splitroot` & :func:`os.path.normpath` with a direct
C call.

..

.. date: 2024-03-25-15-07-01
.. gh-issue: 117195
.. nonce: OWakgD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid assertion failure for debug builds when calling
``object.__sizeof__(1)``

..

.. date: 2024-06-04-12-23-01
.. gh-issue: 119819
.. nonce: WKKrYh
.. section: Library

Fix regression to allow logging configuration with multiprocessing queue
types.

..

.. date: 2024-06-03-11-18-16
.. gh-issue: 117142
.. nonce: kWTXQo
.. section: Library

The :mod:`ctypes` module may now be imported in all subinterpreters,
including those that have their own GIL.

..

.. date: 2024-06-02-15-09-17
.. gh-issue: 118835
.. nonce: KUAuz6
.. section: Library

Fix _pyrepl crash when using custom prompt with ANSI escape codes.

..

.. date: 2024-06-01-16-58-43
.. gh-issue: 117398
.. nonce: kR0RW7
.. section: Library

The ``_datetime`` module (C implementation for :mod:`datetime`) now supports
being imported in multiple interpreters.

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-21-37-05
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: D6S9ig
.. section: Library

Fix issue with :func:`shutil.rmtree` where a :exc:`RecursionError` is raised
on deep directory trees.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-20-42-17
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: 5lPTTW
.. section: Library

Partially fix issue with :func:`shutil.rmtree` where a :exc:`RecursionError`
is raised on deep directory trees. A recursion error is no longer raised
when :data:`!rmtree.avoids_symlink_attacks` is false.

..

.. date: 2024-05-28-12-15-03
.. gh-issue: 119118
.. nonce: FMKz1F
.. section: Library

Fix performance regression in the :mod:`tokenize` module by caching the
``line`` token attribute and calculating the column offset more efficiently.

..

.. date: 2024-05-28-00-56-59
.. gh-issue: 89727
.. nonce: _bxoL3
.. section: Library

Fix issue with :func:`os.fwalk` where a :exc:`RecursionError` was raised on
deep directory trees by adjusting the implementation to be iterative instead
of recursive.

..

.. date: 2024-05-26-21-28-11
.. gh-issue: 119588
.. nonce: wlLBK5
.. section: Library

``zipfile.Path.is_symlink`` now assesses if the given path is a symlink.

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-20-15-26
.. gh-issue: 119555
.. nonce: mvHbEL
.. section: Library

Catch :exc:`SyntaxError` from :func:`compile` in the runsource() method of
the InteractiveColoredConsole.  Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2024-05-24-21-54-55
.. gh-issue: 113892
.. nonce: JKDFqq
.. section: Library

Now, the method ``sock_connect`` of :class:`asyncio.ProactorEventLoop`
raises a :exc:`ValueError` if given socket is not in non-blocking mode, as
well as in other loop implementations.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-22-29-59
.. gh-issue: 119443
.. nonce: KAGz6S
.. section: Library

The interactive REPL no longer runs with ``from __future__ import
annotations`` enabled. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-11-52-36
.. gh-issue: 117398
.. nonce: 2FG1Mk
.. section: Library

Objects in the datetime C-API are now all statically allocated, which means
better memory safety, especially when the module is reloaded. This should be
transparent to users.

..

.. date: 2024-05-22-21-20-43
.. gh-issue: 118894
.. nonce: xHdxR_
.. section: Library

:mod:`asyncio` REPL now has the same capabilities as PyREPL.

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-20-13-23
.. gh-issue: 118911
.. nonce: iG8nMq
.. section: Library

In PyREPL, updated ``maybe-accept``'s logic so that if the user hits
:kbd:`Enter` twice, they are able to terminate the block even if there's
trailing whitespace. Also, now when the user hits arrow up, the cursor is on
the last functional line. This matches IPython's behavior. Patch by Aya
Elsayed.

..

.. date: 2024-05-20-20-30-57
.. gh-issue: 111201
.. nonce: DAA5lC
.. section: Library

Remove dependency to :mod:`readline` from the new Python REPL.

..

.. date: 2024-05-19-18-49-04
.. gh-issue: 119174
.. nonce: 5GTv7d
.. section: Library

Fix high DPI causes turtledemo(turtle-graphics examples) windows blurry
Patch by Wulian233 and Terry Jan Reedy

..

.. date: 2024-05-19-13-05-59
.. gh-issue: 119121
.. nonce: P1gnh1
.. section: Library

Fix a NameError happening in ``asyncio.staggered.staggered_race``. This
function is now tested.

..

.. date: 2024-05-17-17-32-12
.. gh-issue: 119113
.. nonce: kEv1Ll
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :meth:`pathlib.PurePath.with_suffix` didn't raise
:exc:`TypeError` when given ``None`` as a suffix.

..

.. date: 2024-05-16-17-31-46
.. gh-issue: 118643
.. nonce: hAWH4C
.. section: Library

Fix an AttributeError in the :mod:`email` module when re-fold a long address
list. Also fix more cases of incorrect encoding of the address separator in
the address list.

..

.. date: 2024-05-12-21-38-42
.. gh-issue: 58933
.. nonce: 0kgU2l
.. section: Library

Make :mod:`pdb` return to caller frame correctly when ``f_trace`` of the
caller frame is not set

..

.. date: 2024-05-10-05-24-32
.. gh-issue: 118895
.. nonce: wUm5r2
.. section: Library

Setting attributes on :data:`typing.NoDefault` now raises
:exc:`AttributeError` instead of :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. date: 2024-05-09-21-36-11
.. gh-issue: 118868
.. nonce: uckxxP
.. section: Library

Fixed issue where kwargs were no longer passed to the logging handler
QueueHandler

..

.. date: 2024-05-09-08-46-12
.. gh-issue: 118851
.. nonce: aPAoJw
.. section: Library

``ctx`` arguments to the constructors of :mod:`ast` node classes now default
to :class:`ast.Load() <ast.Load>`. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-21-30-33
.. gh-issue: 118760
.. nonce: XvyMHn
.. section: Library

Restore the default value of ``tkiter.wantobjects`` to ``1``.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-21-13-56
.. gh-issue: 118760
.. nonce: mdmH3T
.. section: Library

Fix errors in calling Tkinter bindings on Windows.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-09-21-49
.. gh-issue: 118772
.. nonce: c16E8X
.. section: Library

Allow :class:`typing.TypeVar` instances without a default to follow
instances without a default in some cases. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2024-05-01-22-24-05
.. gh-issue: 110863
.. nonce: GjYBbq
.. section: Library

:func:`os.path.realpath` now suppresses any :exc:`OSError` from
:func:`os.readlink` when *strict* mode is disabled (the default).

..

.. date: 2024-04-19-14-59-53
.. gh-issue: 118033
.. nonce: amS4Gw
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`dataclasses.dataclass` not creating a ``__weakref__`` slot when
subclassing :class:`typing.Generic`.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-21-41-31
.. gh-issue: 106531
.. nonce: Mgd--6
.. section: Library

In :mod:`importlib.resources`, sync with `importlib_resources 6.3.2
<https://importlib-resources.readthedocs.io/en/latest/history.html#v6-3-2>`_,
including: ``MultiplexedPath`` now expects ``Traversable`` paths,
deprecating string arguments to ``MultiplexedPath``; Enabled support for
resources in namespace packages in zip files; Fixed ``NotADirectoryError``
when calling files on a subdirectory of a namespace package.

..

.. date: 2024-01-12-08-51-03
.. gh-issue: 113978
.. nonce: MqTgB0
.. section: Library

Ignore warnings on text completion inside REPL.

..

.. date: 2023-04-28-09-54-15
.. gh-issue: 103956
.. nonce: EyLDPS
.. section: Library

Fix lack of newline characters in :mod:`trace` module output when line
tracing is enabled but source code line for current frame is not available.

..

.. date: 2023-04-26-22-24-17
.. gh-issue: 92081
.. nonce: V8xMot
.. section: Library

Fix missing spaces in email headers when the spaces are mixed with encoded
8-bit characters.

..

.. date: 2023-04-24-05-34-23
.. gh-issue: 103194
.. nonce: GwBwWL
.. section: Library

Prepare Tkinter for C API changes in Tcl 8.7/9.0 to avoid
:class:`!_tkinter.Tcl_Obj` being unexpectedly returned instead of
:class:`bool`, :class:`str`, :class:`bytearray`, or :class:`int`.

..

.. date: 2023-04-10-00-04-37
.. gh-issue: 87106
.. nonce: UyBnPQ
.. section: Library

Fixed handling in :meth:`inspect.Signature.bind` of keyword arguments having
the same name as positional-only arguments when a variadic keyword argument
(e.g. ``**kwargs``) is present.

..

.. bpo: 45767
.. date: 2022-03-10-16-47-57
.. nonce: ywmyo1
.. section: Library

Fix integer conversion in :func:`os.major`, :func:`os.minor`, and
:func:`os.makedev`. Support device numbers larger than ``2**63-1``. Support
non-existent device number (``NODEV``).

..

.. date: 2019-08-27-01-16-50
.. gh-issue: 67693
.. nonce: 4NIAiy
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`urllib.parse.urlunparse` and :func:`urllib.parse.urlunsplit` for
URIs with path starting with multiple slashes and no authority. Based on
patch by Ashwin Ramaswami.

..

.. date: 2024-05-18-10-59-27
.. gh-issue: 119050
.. nonce: g4qiH7
.. section: Tests

regrtest test runner: Add XML support to the refleak checker (-R option).
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-17-40-50
.. gh-issue: 119729
.. nonce: k0xJ5U
.. section: Build

On POSIX systems, the pkg-config (``.pc``) filenames now include the ABI
flags, which may include debug ("d") and free-threaded ("t").  For example:
* ``python-3.14.pc`` (default, non-debug build) * ``python-3.14d.pc``
(default, debug build) * ``python-3.14t.pc`` (free-threaded build)

..

.. date: 2024-05-19-22-54-55
.. gh-issue: 115119
.. nonce: DwMwev
.. section: Build

Fall back to the bundled libmpdec if a system version cannot be found.

..

.. date: 2024-05-17-19-53-27
.. gh-issue: 119132
.. nonce: wepPgM
.. section: Build

Update :data:`sys.version` to identify whether the build is default build or
free-threading build. Patch By Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2024-05-13-15-57-58
.. gh-issue: 118836
.. nonce: 7yN1iB
.. section: Build

Fix an ``AssertionError`` when building with ``--enable-experimental-jit``
and the compiler emits a ``SHT_NOTE`` section.

..

.. date: 2024-05-11-15-11-30
.. gh-issue: 118943
.. nonce: VI_MnY
.. section: Build

Fix a possible race condition affecting parallel builds configured with
``--enable-experimental-jit``, in which compilation errors could be caused
by an incompletely-generated header file.

..

.. date: 2024-05-30-17-39-25
.. gh-issue: 119679
.. nonce: mZC87w
.. section: Windows

Ensures correct import libraries are included in Windows installs.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-11-06-12
.. gh-issue: 119690
.. nonce: 8q6e1p
.. section: Windows

Adds Unicode support and fixes audit events for ``_winapi.CreateNamedPipe``.

..

.. date: 2024-05-25-18-43-10
.. gh-issue: 111201
.. nonce: SLPJIx
.. section: Windows

Add support for new pyrepl on Windows

..

.. date: 2024-05-22-19-43-29
.. gh-issue: 119070
.. nonce: _enton
.. section: Windows

Fixes ``py.exe`` handling of shebangs like ``/usr/bin/env python3.12``,
which were previously interpreted as ``python3.exe`` instead of
``python3.12.exe``.

..

.. date: 2024-04-24-22-50-33
.. gh-issue: 117505
.. nonce: gcTb_p
.. section: Windows

Fixes an issue with the Windows installer not running ensurepip in a fully
isolated environment. This could cause unexpected interactions with the user
site-packages.

..

.. date: 2024-04-24-05-16-32
.. gh-issue: 118209
.. nonce: Ryyzlz
.. section: Windows

Avoid crashing in :mod:`mmap` on Windows when the mapped memory is
inaccessible due to file system errors or access violations.

..

.. date: 2024-03-19-19-04-56
.. gh-issue: 116145
.. nonce: srVT3d
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled Tcl/Tk to 8.6.14.

..

.. date: 2024-05-29-21-05-59
.. gh-issue: 119585
.. nonce: Sn7JL3
.. section: C API

Fix crash when a thread state that was created by
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` calls a destructor that during
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Clear` that calls back into
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`. This might
occur when in the free-threaded build or when using thread-local variables
whose destructors call :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

..

.. date: 2024-05-22-17-50-48
.. gh-issue: 119336
.. nonce: ff3qnS
.. section: C API

Restore the removed ``_PyLong_NumBits()`` function. It is used by the
pywin32 project. Patch by Ethan Smith

..

.. date: 2024-05-21-11-35-11
.. gh-issue: 119247
.. nonce: U6n6mh
.. section: C API

Added ``Py_BEGIN_CRITICAL_SECTION_SEQUENCE_FAST`` and
``Py_END_CRITICAL_SECTION_SEQUENCE_FAST`` macros to make it possible to use
PySequence_Fast APIs safely when free-threaded, and update str.join to work
without the GIL using them.

..

.. date: 2024-05-20-10-35-22
.. gh-issue: 111389
.. nonce: a6axBk
.. section: C API

Add :c:macro:`PyHASH_MULTIPLIER` constant: prime multiplier used in string
and various other hashes. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-23-14-06
.. gh-issue: 116984
.. nonce: 5sgcDo
.. section: C API

Make mimalloc includes relative to the current file to avoid embedders or
extensions needing to include ``Internal/mimalloc`` if they are already
including internal CPython headers.

..

.. date: 2024-05-08-20-13-00
.. gh-issue: 118789
.. nonce: m88uUa
.. section: C API

Restore ``_PyWeakref_ClearRef`` that was previously removed in Python 3.13
alpha 1.
