.. date: 2026-02-17-00-15-11
.. gh-issue: 144551
.. nonce: ydhtXd
.. release date: 2026-04-07
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.19.

..

.. date: 2025-10-17-01-07-03
.. gh-issue: 137586
.. nonce: kVzxvp
.. section: macOS

Invoke :program:`osascript` with absolute path in :mod:`webbrowser` and
:mod:`!turtledemo`.

..

.. date: 2026-02-13-11-07-51
.. gh-issue: 144551
.. nonce: ENtMYD
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.19.

..

.. date: 2025-10-19-23-44-46
.. gh-issue: 140131
.. nonce: AABF2k
.. section: Windows

Fix REPL cursor position on Windows when module completion suggestion line
hits console width.

..

.. date: 2026-04-03-21-37-18
.. gh-issue: 144418
.. nonce: PusC0S
.. section: Tests

The Android testbed's emulator RAM has been increased from 2 GB to 4 GB.

..

.. date: 2026-03-24-00-15-58
.. gh-issue: 146202
.. nonce: LgH6Bj
.. section: Tests

Fix a race condition in regrtest: make sure that the temporary directory is
created in the worker process. Previously, temp_cwd() could fail on Windows
if the "build" directory was not created.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-02-12-12-12-00
.. gh-issue: 144739
.. nonce: -fx1tN
.. section: Tests

When Python was compiled with system expat older then 2.7.2 but tests run
with newer expat, still skip
:class:`!test.test_pyexpat.MemoryProtectionTest`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-14-17-31-39
.. gh-issue: 145986
.. nonce: ifSSr8
.. section: Security

:mod:`xml.parsers.expat`: Fixed a crash caused by unbounded C recursion when
converting deeply nested XML content models with
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.ElementDeclHandler`. This addresses
:cve:`2026-4224`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-06-17-03-38
.. gh-issue: 145599
.. nonce: kchwZV
.. section: Security

Reject control characters in :class:`http.cookies.Morsel`
:meth:`~http.cookies.Morsel.update` and
:meth:`~http.cookies.BaseCookie.js_output`. This addresses :cve:`2026-3644`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-04-18-59-17
.. gh-issue: 145506
.. nonce: 6hwvEh
.. section: Security

Fixes :cve:`2026-2297` by ensuring that ``SourcelessFileLoader`` uses
:func:`io.open_code` when opening ``.pyc`` files.

..

.. date: 2026-01-31-21-56-54
.. gh-issue: 144370
.. nonce: fp9m8t
.. section: Security

Disallow usage of control characters in status in :mod:`wsgiref.handlers` to
prevent HTTP header injections. Patch by Benedikt Johannes.

..

.. date: 2026-01-16-12-04-49
.. gh-issue: 143930
.. nonce: zYC5x3
.. section: Security

Reject leading dashes in URLs passed to :func:`webbrowser.open`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-01-04-00
.. gh-issue: 144503
.. nonce: argvfs
.. section: Library

Fix a regression introduced in 3.14.3 and 3.13.12 where the
:mod:`multiprocessing` ``forkserver`` start method would fail with
:exc:`BrokenPipeError` when the parent process had a very large
:data:`sys.argv`.  The argv is now passed to the forkserver as separate
command-line arguments rather than being embedded in the ``-c`` command
string, avoiding the operating system's per-argument length limit.

..

.. date: 2026-04-01-11-05-36
.. gh-issue: 146613
.. nonce: GzjUFK
.. section: Library

:mod:`itertools`: Fix a crash in :func:`itertools.groupby` when the grouper
iterator is concurrently mutated.

..

.. date: 2026-03-28-13-19-20
.. gh-issue: 146080
.. nonce: srN12a
.. section: Library

:mod:`ssl`: fix a crash when an SNI callback tries to use an SSL object that
has already been garbage-collected. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-03-28-12-05-34
.. gh-issue: 146090
.. nonce: wf9_ef
.. section: Library

:mod:`sqlite3`: fix a crash when :meth:`sqlite3.Connection.create_collation`
fails with `SQLITE_BUSY <https://sqlite.org/rescode.html#busy>`__. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-03-28-12-01-48
.. gh-issue: 146090
.. nonce: wh1qJR
.. section: Library

:mod:`sqlite3`: properly raise :exc:`MemoryError` instead of
:exc:`SystemError` when a context callback fails to be allocated. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-11-04-42
.. gh-issue: 145633
.. nonce: RWjlaX
.. section: Library

Fix ``struct.pack('f', float)``: use :c:func:`PyFloat_Pack4` to raise
:exc:`OverflowError`. Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev and Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-03-24-03-49-50
.. gh-issue: 146310
.. nonce: WhlDir
.. section: Library

The :mod:`ensurepip` module no longer looks for ``pip-*.whl`` wheel packages
in the current directory.

..

.. date: 2026-03-17-20-52-24
.. gh-issue: 146083
.. nonce: NxZa_c
.. section: Library

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.7.5.

..

.. date: 2026-03-17-20-41-27
.. gh-issue: 146076
.. nonce: yoBNnB
.. section: Library

:mod:`zoneinfo`: fix crashes when deleting ``_weak_cache`` from a
:class:`zoneinfo.ZoneInfo` subclass.

..

.. date: 2026-03-17-11-46-20
.. gh-issue: 146054
.. nonce: udYcqn
.. section: Library

Limit the size of :func:`encodings.search_function` cache. Found by OSS Fuzz
in :oss-fuzz:`493449985`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-12-21-01-48
.. gh-issue: 145883
.. nonce: lUvXcc
.. section: Library

:mod:`zoneinfo`: Fix heap buffer overflow reads from malformed TZif data.
Found by OSS Fuzz, issues :oss-fuzz:`492245058` and :oss-fuzz:`492230068`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-10-14-13-12
.. gh-issue: 145750
.. nonce: iQsTeX
.. section: Library

Avoid undefined behaviour from signed integer overflow when parsing format
strings in the :mod:`struct` module. Found by OSS Fuzz in
:oss-fuzz:`488466741`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-09-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 145492
.. nonce: 457Afc
.. section: Library

Fix infinite recursion in :class:`collections.defaultdict` ``__repr__`` when
a ``defaultdict`` contains itself. Based on analysis by KowalskiThomas in
:gh:`145492`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-07-15-00-00
.. gh-issue: 145623
.. nonce: 2Y7LzT
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :mod:`struct` when calling :func:`repr` or ``__sizeof__()`` on
an uninitialized :class:`struct.Struct` object created via
``Struct.__new__()`` without calling ``__init__()``.

..

.. date: 2026-03-07-02-44-52
.. gh-issue: 145616
.. nonce: x8Mf23
.. section: Library

Detect Android sysconfig ABI correctly on 32-bit ARM Android on 64-bit ARM
kernel

..

.. date: 2026-03-06-20-17-45
.. gh-issue: 145376
.. nonce: 0F7HFq
.. section: Library

Fix null pointer dereference in unusual error scenario in :mod:`hashlib`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-05-19-01-28
.. gh-issue: 145551
.. nonce: gItPRl
.. section: Library

Fix InvalidStateError when cancelling process created by
:func:`asyncio.create_subprocess_exec` or
:func:`asyncio.create_subprocess_shell`. Patch by Daan De Meyer.

..

.. date: 2026-03-03-11-49-44
.. gh-issue: 145417
.. nonce: m_HxIL
.. section: Library

:mod:`venv`: Prevent incorrect preservation of SELinux context when copying
the ``Activate.ps1`` script. The script inherited the SELinux security
context of the system template directory, rather than the destination
project directory.

..

.. date: 2026-02-27-19-00-26
.. gh-issue: 145301
.. nonce: 2Wih4b
.. section: Library

:mod:`hashlib`: fix a crash when the initialization of the underlying C
extension module fails.

..

.. date: 2026-02-26-20-13-16
.. gh-issue: 145264
.. nonce: 4pggX_
.. section: Library

Base64 decoder (see :func:`binascii.a2b_base64`, :func:`base64.b64decode`,
etc) no longer ignores excess data after the first padded quad in non-strict
(default) mode.  Instead, in conformance with :rfc:`4648`, section 3.3, it
now ignores the pad character, "=", if it is present before the end of the
encoded data.

..

.. date: 2026-02-23-20-52-55
.. gh-issue: 145158
.. nonce: vWJtxI
.. section: Library

Avoid undefined behaviour from signed integer overflow when parsing format
strings in the :mod:`struct` module.

..

.. date: 2026-02-19-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 144984
.. nonce: b93995c982
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :meth:`xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.ExternalEntityParserCreate`
when an allocation fails. The error paths could dereference NULL
``handlers`` and double-decrement the parent parser's reference count.

..

.. date: 2026-02-19-10-57-40
.. gh-issue: 88091
.. nonce: N7qGV-
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`unicodedata.decomposition` for Hangul characters.

..

.. date: 2026-02-15-12-02-20
.. gh-issue: 144835
.. nonce: w_oS_J
.. section: Library

Added missing explanations for some parameters in :func:`glob.glob` and
:func:`glob.iglob`.

..

.. date: 2026-02-15-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 144833
.. nonce: TUelo1
.. section: Library

Fixed a use-after-free in :mod:`ssl` when ``SSL_new()`` returns NULL in
``newPySSLSocket()``. The error was reported via a dangling pointer after
the object had already been freed.

..

.. date: 2026-02-11-21-01-30
.. gh-issue: 144259
.. nonce: OAhOR8
.. section: Library

Fix inconsistent display of long multiline pasted content in the REPL.

..

.. date: 2026-02-10-22-05-51
.. gh-issue: 144156
.. nonce: UbrC7F
.. section: Library

Fix the folding of headers by the :mod:`email` library when :rfc:`2047`
encoded words are used.  Now whitespace is correctly preserved and also
correctly added between adjacent encoded words.  The latter property was
broken by the fix for gh-92081, which mostly fixed previous failures to
preserve whitespace.

..

.. date: 2026-02-10-16-56-05
.. gh-issue: 66305
.. nonce: PZ6GN8
.. section: Library

Fixed a hang on Windows in the :mod:`tempfile` module when trying to create
a temporary file or subdirectory in a non-writable directory.

..

.. date: 2026-02-08-22-04-06
.. gh-issue: 140814
.. nonce: frzSpn
.. section: Library

:func:`multiprocessing.freeze_support` no longer sets the default start
method as a side effect, which previously caused a subsequent
:func:`multiprocessing.set_start_method` call to raise :exc:`RuntimeError`.

..

.. date: 2026-02-07-16-37-42
.. gh-issue: 144475
.. nonce: 8tFEXw
.. section: Library

Calling :func:`repr` on :func:`functools.partial` is now safer when the
partial object's internal attributes are replaced while the string
representation is being generated.

..

.. date: 2026-02-06-23-58-54
.. gh-issue: 144538
.. nonce: 5_OvGv
.. section: Library

Bump the version of pip bundled in ensurepip to version 26.0.1

..

.. date: 2026-01-31-17-15-49
.. gh-issue: 144363
.. nonce: X9f0sU
.. section: Library

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to 2.7.4

..

.. date: 2026-01-17-08-44-25
.. gh-issue: 143637
.. nonce: qyPqDo
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in socket.sendmsg() that could occur if ancillary data is
mutated re-entrantly during argument parsing.

..

.. date: 2026-01-15-13-03-22
.. gh-issue: 143880
.. nonce: sWoLsf
.. section: Library

Fix data race in :func:`functools.partial` in the :term:`free threading`
build.

..

.. date: 2026-01-13-10-38-43
.. gh-issue: 143543
.. nonce: DeQRCO
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in itertools.groupby that could occur when a user-defined
:meth:`~object.__eq__` method re-enters the iterator during key comparison.

..

.. date: 2026-01-12-19-39-57
.. gh-issue: 140652
.. nonce: HvM9Bl
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :func:`!_interpchannels.list_all` after closing a channel.

..

.. date: 2026-01-11-18-35-52
.. gh-issue: 143698
.. nonce: gXDzsJ
.. section: Library

Allow *scheduler* and *setpgroup* arguments to be explicitly :const:`None`
when calling :func:`os.posix_spawn` or :func:`os.posix_spawnp`. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-01-11-16-59-22
.. gh-issue: 143698
.. nonce: b-Cpeb
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`SystemError` when the *scheduler* in
:func:`os.posix_spawn` or :func:`os.posix_spawnp` is not a tuple. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-01-01-05-26-00
.. gh-issue: 143304
.. nonce: Kv7x9Q
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`ctypes.CDLL` to honor the ``handle`` parameter on POSIX systems.

..

.. date: 2025-12-18-00-14-16
.. gh-issue: 142781
.. nonce: gcOeYF
.. section: Library

:mod:`zoneinfo`: fix a crash when instantiating :class:`~zoneinfo.ZoneInfo`
objects for which the internal class-level cache is inconsistent.

..

.. date: 2025-12-18-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 142763
.. nonce: AJpZPVG5
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition between :class:`zoneinfo.ZoneInfo` creation and
:func:`zoneinfo.ZoneInfo.clear_cache` that could raise :exc:`KeyError`.

..

.. date: 2025-12-16-13-34-48
.. gh-issue: 142787
.. nonce: wNitJX
.. section: Library

Fix assertion failure in :mod:`sqlite3` blob subscript when slicing with
indices that result in an empty slice.

..

.. date: 2025-12-06-16-14-18
.. gh-issue: 142352
.. nonce: pW5HLX88
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`asyncio.StreamWriter.start_tls` to transfer buffered data from
:class:`~asyncio.StreamReader` to the SSL layer, preventing data loss when
upgrading a connection to TLS mid-stream (e.g., when implementing PROXY
protocol support).

..

.. date: 2025-11-18-06-35-53
.. gh-issue: 141707
.. nonce: DBmQIy
.. section: Library

Don't change :class:`tarfile.TarInfo` type from ``AREGTYPE`` to ``DIRTYPE``
when parsing GNU long name or link headers.

..

.. date: 2025-10-11-11-50-59
.. gh-issue: 139933
.. nonce: 05MHlx
.. section: Library

Improve :exc:`AttributeError` suggestions for classes with a custom
:meth:`~object.__dir__` method returning a list of unsortable values. Patch
by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-09-15-21-03-11
.. gh-issue: 138891
.. nonce: oZFdtR
.. section: Library

Fix ``SyntaxError`` when ``inspect.get_annotations(f, eval_str=True)`` is
called on a function annotated with a :pep:`646` ``star_expression``

..

.. date: 2025-08-04-23-20-43
.. gh-issue: 137335
.. nonce: IIjDJN
.. section: Library

Get rid of any possibility of a name conflict for named pipes in
:mod:`multiprocessing` and :mod:`asyncio` on Windows, no matter how small.

..

.. date: 2023-02-05-20-02-30
.. gh-issue: 80667
.. nonce: 7LmzeA
.. section: Library

Support lookup for Tangut Ideographs in :mod:`unicodedata`.

..

.. bpo: 40243
.. date: 2020-04-10-14-29-53
.. nonce: 85HRib
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!unicodedata.ucd_3_2_0.numeric` for non-decimal values.

..

.. date: 2026-03-25-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 126676
.. nonce: 052336
.. section: Documentation

Expand :mod:`argparse` documentation for ``type=bool`` with a demonstration
of the surprising behavior and pointers to common alternatives.

..

.. date: 2026-03-03-08-18-00
.. gh-issue: 145450
.. nonce: VI7GXj
.. section: Documentation

Document missing public :class:`wave.Wave_write` getter methods.

..

.. date: 2026-04-06-11-15-46
.. gh-issue: 148157
.. nonce: JFnZDn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an unlikely crash when parsing an invalid type comments for function
parameters. Found by OSS Fuzz in :oss-fuzz:`492782951`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-31-01-06-35
.. gh-issue: 146615
.. nonce: fix-method-get
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in :meth:`~object.__get__` for :c:expr:`METH_METHOD` descriptors
when an invalid (non-type) object is passed as the second argument. Patch by
Steven Sun.

..

.. date: 2026-03-21-15-05-14
.. gh-issue: 146128
.. nonce: DG1Hfa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug which could cause constant values to be partially corrupted in
AArch64 JIT code. This issue is theoretical, and hasn't actually been
observed in unmodified Python interpreters.

..

.. date: 2026-03-21-11-55-16
.. gh-issue: 146250
.. nonce: ahl3O2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a memory leak in :exc:`SyntaxError` when re-initializing it.

..

.. date: 2026-03-21-08-48-25
.. gh-issue: 146245
.. nonce: cqM3_4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed reference leaks in :mod:`socket` when audit hooks raise exceptions in
:func:`socket.getaddrinfo` and :meth:`!socket.sendto`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-20-13-07-33
.. gh-issue: 146227
.. nonce: MqBPEo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix wrong type in ``_Py_atomic_load_uint16`` in the C11 atomics backend
(``pyatomic_std.h``), which used a 32-bit atomic load instead of 16-bit.
Found by Mohammed Zuhaib.

..

.. date: 2026-03-18-18-52-00
.. gh-issue: 146056
.. nonce: r1tVSo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`repr` for lists containing ``NULL``\ s.

..

.. date: 2026-03-15-21-45-35
.. gh-issue: 145990
.. nonce: tmXwRB
.. section: Core and Builtins

``python --help-env`` sections are now sorted by environment variable name.

..

.. date: 2026-03-11-21-27-28
.. gh-issue: 145376
.. nonce: LfDvyw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix GC tracking in ``structseq.__replace__()``.

..

.. date: 2026-03-11-00-13-59
.. gh-issue: 142183
.. nonce: 2iVhJH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid a pathological case where repeated calls at a specific stack depth
could be significantly slower.

..

.. date: 2026-03-10-19-00-39
.. gh-issue: 145783
.. nonce: dS5TM9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an unlikely crash in the parser when certain errors were erroneously not
propagated. Found by OSS Fuzz in :oss-fuzz:`491369109`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-09-18-52-03
.. gh-issue: 145701
.. nonce: 79KQyO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`SystemError` when ``__classdict__`` or
``__conditional_annotations__`` is in a class-scope inlined comprehension.
Found by OSS Fuzz in :oss-fuzz:`491105000`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-01-13-37-31
.. gh-issue: 145335
.. nonce: e36kPJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in :func:`os.pathconf` when called with ``-1`` as the path
argument.

..

.. date: 2026-02-26-21-36-00
.. gh-issue: 145234
.. nonce: w0mQ9n
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a ``SystemError`` in the parser when an encoding cookie (for example,
UTF-7) decodes to carriage returns (``\r``). Newlines are now normalized
after decoding in the string tokenizer.

Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2026-02-26-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 130555
.. nonce: TMSOIu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix use-after-free in :meth:`dict.clear` when the dictionary values are
embedded in an object and a destructor causes re-entrant mutation of the
dictionary.

..

.. date: 2026-02-19-19-23-12
.. gh-issue: 145008
.. nonce: tHYQv6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug when calling certain methods at the recursion limit which
manifested as a corruption of Python's operand stack. Patch by Ken Jin.

..

.. date: 2026-02-16-12-28-43
.. gh-issue: 144872
.. nonce: k9_Q30
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix heap buffer overflow in the parser found by OSS-Fuzz.

..

.. date: 2026-02-13-18-30-59
.. gh-issue: 144766
.. nonce: JGu3x3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in fork child process when perf support is enabled.

..

.. date: 2026-02-13-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 144759
.. nonce: d3qYpe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behavior in the lexer when ``start`` and ``multi_line_start``
pointers are ``NULL`` in ``_PyLexer_remember_fstring_buffers()`` and
``_PyLexer_restore_fstring_buffers()``. The ``NULL`` pointer arithmetic
(``NULL - valid_pointer``) is now guarded with explicit ``NULL`` checks.

..

.. date: 2026-02-08-12-47-27
.. gh-issue: 144601
.. nonce: E4Yi9J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when importing a module whose ``PyInit`` function raises an
exception from a subinterpreter.

..

.. date: 2026-01-10-12-59-58
.. gh-issue: 143636
.. nonce: dzr26e
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when calling :class:`SimpleNamespace.__replace__()
<types.SimpleNamespace>` on non-namespace instances. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-01-10-10-58-36
.. gh-issue: 143650
.. nonce: k8mR4x
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix race condition in :mod:`importlib` where a thread could receive a stale
module reference when another thread's import fails.

..

.. date: 2025-11-02-16-23-17
.. gh-issue: 140594
.. nonce: YIWUpl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an out of bounds read when a single NUL character is read from the
standard input. Patch by Shamil Abdulaev.

..

.. date: 2025-07-07-17-26-06
.. gh-issue: 91636
.. nonce: GyHU72
.. section: Core and Builtins

While performing garbage collection, clear weakrefs to unreachable objects
that are created during running of finalizers.  If those weakrefs were are
not cleared, they could reveal unreachable objects.

..

.. date: 2025-02-19-21-06-30
.. gh-issue: 130327
.. nonce: z3TaR8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix erroneous clearing of an object's :attr:`~object.__dict__` if
overwritten at runtime.

..

.. date: 2023-07-26-00-03-00
.. gh-issue: 80667
.. nonce: N7Dh8B
.. section: Core and Builtins

Literals using the ``\N{name}`` escape syntax can now construct CJK
ideographs and Hangul syllables using case-insensitive names.

..

.. date: 2026-03-28-02-48-51
.. gh-issue: 146541
.. nonce: k-zlM6
.. section: Build

The Android testbed can now be built for 32-bit ARM and x86 targets.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-14-35-29
.. gh-issue: 146450
.. nonce: 9Kmp5Q
.. section: Build

The Android build script was modified to improve parity with other platform
build scripts.

..

.. date: 2026-03-11-11-58-42
.. gh-issue: 145801
.. nonce: iCXa3v
.. section: Build

When Python build is optimized with GCC using PGO, use
``-fprofile-update=atomic`` option to use atomic operations when updating
profile information. This option reduces the risk of gcov Data Files (.gcda)
corruption which can cause random GCC crashes. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-02-17-14-57-47
.. gh-issue: 129259
.. nonce: aix8k3
.. section: Build

Fix AIX build failures caused by incorrect struct alignment in
``_Py_CODEUNIT`` and ``_Py_BackoffCounter`` by adding AIX-specific ``#pragma
pack`` directives.
