.. date: 2026-06-09-10-23-57
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: 91GpWQ
.. release date: 2026-06-10
.. section: Security

Update Android and iOS installers to use OpenSSL 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-09-36-20
.. gh-issue: 150599
.. nonce: nlHqU-
.. section: Security

Fix a possible stack buffer overflow in :mod:`bz2` when a
:class:`bz2.BZ2Decompressor` is reused after a decompression error. The
decompressor now becomes unusable after libbz2 reports an error.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-17-46-00
.. gh-issue: 149835
.. nonce: EebFlk
.. section: Security

:func:`shutil.move` now resolves symlinks via :func:`os.path.realpath` when
checking whether the destination is inside the source directory, preventing
a symlink-based bypass of that guard.

..

.. date: 2026-05-11-21-15-07
.. gh-issue: 149698
.. nonce: OudOcW
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.1
for the fix for :cve:`2026-45186`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-18-05-32
.. gh-issue: 87451
.. nonce: XkKB6M
.. section: Security

The :mod:`ftplib` module's undocumented ``ftpcp`` function no longer trusts
the IPv4 address value returned from the source server in response to the
``PASV`` command by default, completing the fix for CVE-2021-4189.  As with
:class:`ftplib.FTP`, the former behavior can be re-enabled by setting the
``trust_server_pasv_ipv4_address`` attribute on the source
:class:`ftplib.FTP` instance to ``True``.  Thanks to Qi Deng at Aurascape AI
for the report.

..

.. date: 2026-05-03-21-00-00
.. gh-issue: 149486
.. nonce: tarflt
.. section: Security

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now validates link targets using the same
normalised value that is written to disk, strips trailing separators from
the member name when resolving a symlink's directory, and rejects link
members that would replace the destination directory itself. This closes
several path-traversal bypasses of the ``data`` extraction filter.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-16-36-11
.. gh-issue: 149079
.. nonce: vKl-LM
.. section: Security

Fix a potential denial of service in :func:`unicodedata.normalize`. The
canonical ordering step of Unicode normalization used a quadratic-time
insertion sort for reordering combining characters, which could be exploited
with crafted input containing many combining characters in non-canonical
order. Replaced with a linear-time counting sort for long runs.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-19-30-45
.. gh-issue: 149018
.. nonce: a9SqWb
.. section: Security

Improved protection against XML hash-flooding attacks in
:mod:`xml.parsers.expat` and :mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree` when Python is
compiled with libExpat 2.8.0 or later.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-24-35
.. gh-issue: 151112
.. nonce: 4RKCkD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the compiler that could occur when running out of memory.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-10-28-30
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: DKa6Sl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash, when there's no memory left on a device, which happened in:

- code compilation - :func:`!_winapi.CreateProcess`

Now these places raise proper :exc:`MemoryError` errors.

..

.. date: 2026-06-01-19-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150700
.. nonce: W8CzVR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a :exc:`SystemError` when compiling a class-scope comprehension
containing a ``lambda`` that references ``__class__``, ``__classdict__``, or
``__conditional_annotations__``. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-20-19-35
.. gh-issue: 150633
.. nonce: XkNul0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the frozen importer accepting module names with embedded null bytes,
which caused it to bypass the :data:`sys.modules` cache and create duplicate
module objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-24-22-46-49
.. gh-issue: 148613
.. nonce: PLpmyd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race in the free-threaded build between :func:`gc.set_threshold`
and garbage collection scheduling during object allocation.

..

.. date: 2026-05-24-14-45-00
.. gh-issue: 149156
.. nonce: NP73rB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an intermittent crash after :func:`os.fork` when perf trampoline
profiling is enabled and the child returns through trampoline frames
inherited from the parent process.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-22-08-01
.. gh-issue: 149449
.. nonce: 2lhQFF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free crash when the :mod:`unicodedata` module was removed
from :data:`sys.modules` and garbage-collected between calls that decode
``\N{...}`` escapes or use the ``namereplace`` codec error handler.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-21-52-38
.. gh-issue: 150207
.. nonce: l2BUtI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a memory allocation fails during tokenizer initialization.
A proper :exc:`MemoryError` is now raised instead.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-17-09-28
.. gh-issue: 150107
.. nonce: GD72-D
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`asyncio`: ``sendfile()`` and ``sock_sendfile()`` event loop methods
now call ``file.seek(offset)`` if *file* has a ``seek()`` method, even if
*offset* is ``0`` (default value).

..

.. date: 2026-05-20-13-06-17
.. gh-issue: 150146
.. nonce: i5m_SL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash on a complex type variable substitution.

``from typing import TypeVar; memoryview[TypeVar("")][*typing.Mapping[...,
...]]`` used to fail due to missing ``NULL`` check on ``_unpack_args`` C
function call.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-13-47-17
.. gh-issue: 149590
.. nonce: IPBeQx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when faulthandler is imported more than once.

..

.. date: 2026-05-16-11-03-54
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: X_gqMT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition in ``_PyBytes_FromList`` in free-threading mode.

..

.. date: 2026-05-15-11-31-57
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: ugN2rx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition in :class:`memoryview` with free-threading.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-21-26-26
.. gh-issue: 149805
.. nonce: IG6cza
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a :exc:`SystemError` when compiling a compiling ``__classdict__`` class
annotation. Found by OSS-Fuzz in :oss-fuzz:`512907042`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-06-54-41
.. gh-issue: 149738
.. nonce: 4BLFoH
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`sqlite3`: Disallow removing ``row_factory`` and ``text_factory``
attributes of a connection to prevent a crash on a query.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-16-47-23
.. gh-issue: 139808
.. nonce: iIs7_E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add branch protections for AArch64 (BTI/PAC) in assembly code used by
:option:`-X perf_jit <-X>` (Linux perf profiler integration).

..

.. date: 2026-04-15-15-48-04
.. gh-issue: 148450
.. nonce: 2MEVqH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``abc.register()`` so it invalidates type version tags for registered
classes.

..

.. date: 2026-06-07-17-29-33
.. gh-issue: 151039
.. nonce: AZ0qBn
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when static :mod:`datetime` types outlive the ``_datetime``
module.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-21-49-18
.. gh-issue: 150913
.. nonce: EmptyBl
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`sqlite3.Blob` slice assignment to raise :exc:`TypeError` and
:exc:`IndexError` for type and size mismatches respectively, even when the
target slice is empty.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-18-22-56
.. gh-issue: 143008
.. nonce: z5tw-J
.. section: Library

Fix race conditions when re-initializing a :class:`io.TextIOWrapper` object.

..

.. date: 2026-06-02-14-21-46
.. gh-issue: 150750
.. nonce: SVS2o0
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in :meth:`collections.deque.index` with free-threading.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-17-47-30
.. gh-issue: 150685
.. nonce: EBB2mU
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 26.1.2

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150406
.. nonce: jF3g63
.. section: Library

Fix a possible crash occurring during :mod:`socket` module initialization
when the system is out of memory on platforms without a reentrant
``gethostbyname``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-07-22-05
.. gh-issue: 150372
.. nonce: 9hLqhe
.. section: Library

:mod:`readline`: Fix a potential crash during tab completion caused by an
out-of-memory error during module initialization.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-20-47-45
.. gh-issue: 150157
.. nonce: ZvmO-bQZ
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in free-threaded builds that occurs when pickling by name
objects without a ``__module__`` attribute while :data:`sys.modules` is
concurrently being modified.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-11-25-58
.. gh-issue: 150175
.. nonce: 8H4Caz
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :class:`unittest.mock.ThreadingMock` where concurrent
calls could lose increments to ``call_count`` and other attributes due to a
missing lock in ``_increment_mock_call``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-19-19-00-49
.. gh-issue: 84353
.. nonce: ZU5zaQ
.. section: Library

Preserve non-UTF-8 encoded filenames when appending to a
:class:`zipfile.ZipFile`.  Previously, non-ASCII names stored in a legacy
encoding (without the UTF-8 flag bit set) could be corrupted when the
central directory was rewritten: they were decoded as cp437 and then
re-stored as UTF-8.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-22-45-54
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: T68vc_
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :attr:`ssl.SSLContext.sni_callback`

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-07-44-46
.. gh-issue: 149995
.. nonce: vvtFHn
.. section: Library

Update various docstrings in :mod:`typing`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-22-37-02
.. gh-issue: 88726
.. nonce: BAoL6j
.. section: Library

The :mod:`email` package now uses standard MIME charset names "gb2312" and
"big5" instead of non-standard names "eucgb2312_cn" and "big5_tw".

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-02-25-56
.. gh-issue: 149571
.. nonce: LNyuWJ
.. section: Library

Fix the C implementation of :meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.itertext`:
it no longer emits text for comments and processing instructions.

..

.. date: 2026-05-16-21-08-33
.. gh-issue: 149921
.. nonce: I1yNML
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in error paths of the :mod:`!_interpchannels` and
:mod:`!_interpqueues` extension modules.

..

.. date: 2026-05-14-15-55-28
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: ZaXQ0q
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in ``_random.Random.__init__`` method in free-threading
mode.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-23-18-39
.. gh-issue: 149801
.. nonce: S_FfGr
.. section: Library

Add IANA registered names and aliases with leading zeros before number (like
IBM00858, CP00858, IBM01140, CP01140) for corresponding codecs.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-06-24-54
.. gh-issue: 149701
.. nonce: 8v9RTm
.. section: Library

Fix bad return code from Lib/venv/bin/activate if hashing is disabled

..

.. date: 2026-05-08-15-08-35
.. gh-issue: 112821
.. nonce: t9T1YD
.. section: Library

In the REPL, autocompletion might run arbitrary code in the getter of a
descriptor. If that getter raised an exception, autocompletion would fail to
present any options for the entire object.  Autocompletion now works as
expected for these objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-14-18-47
.. gh-issue: 149489
.. nonce: bX9iHe
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`~xml.etree.ElementTree` serialization to HTML. The content of
elements "xmp", "iframe", "noembed", "noframes", and "plaintext" is no
longer escaped. The "plaintext" element no longer have the closing tag.

..

.. date: 2026-05-01-16-45-31
.. gh-issue: 149231
.. nonce: x2nBEE
.. section: Library

In :mod:`tomllib`, the number of parts in TOML keys is now limited.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-11-12-00
.. gh-issue: 149046
.. nonce: 74shDd
.. section: Library

:mod:`io`: Fix :class:`io.StringIO` serialization: no longer call
``str(obj)`` on :class:`str` subclasses. Patch by Thomas Kowalski.

..

.. date: 2026-04-24-19-54-00
.. gh-issue: 148954
.. nonce: v1
.. section: Library

Fix XML injection vulnerability in :func:`xmlrpc.client.dumps` where the
``methodname`` was not being escaped before interpolation into the XML body.

..

.. date: 2026-04-23-12-50-15
.. gh-issue: 148441
.. nonce: zvpCkR
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.parsers.expat`: prevent a crash in
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.CharacterDataHandler` when the character
data size exceeds the parser's :attr:`buffer size
<xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.buffer_size>`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-09-30-00
.. gh-issue: 146452
.. nonce: Y2N6qZ8J
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in :mod:`pickle` when pickling a dictionary concurrently
mutated by another thread in the free-threaded build.

..

.. date: 2025-12-17-04-10-35
.. gh-issue: 142831
.. nonce: ee3t4L
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the :mod:`json` module where a use-after-free could occur if
the object being encoded is modified during serialization.

..

.. date: 2025-09-26-18-04-28
.. gh-issue: 90949
.. nonce: YHjSzX
.. section: Library

Add
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionActivationThreshold`
and
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionMaximumAmplification`
to :ref:`xmlparser <xmlparser-objects>` objects to tune protections against
`billion laughs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Billion_laughs_attack>`_
attacks. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-21-08-25
.. gh-issue: 134261
.. nonce: ravGYm
.. section: Library

zip: On reproducible builds, ZipFile uses UTC instead of the local time when
writing file datetimes to avoid underflows.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-13-36-02
.. gh-issue: 128110
.. nonce: 9wx_G0
.. section: Library

Fix bug in the parsing of :mod:`email` address headers that could result in
extraneous spaces in the decoded text when using a modern email policy.
Space between pairs of adjacent :rfc:`2047` encoded-words is now ignored,
per section 6.2 (and consistent with existing parsing of unstructured
headers like *Subject*).

..

.. date: 2024-11-02-02-02-31
.. gh-issue: 107398
.. nonce: uUtA6Q
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tarfile` stream mode exception when process the file with the gzip
extra field.

..

.. date: 2024-09-09-12-48-37
.. gh-issue: 123853
.. nonce: e-zFxb
.. section: Library

Update the table of Windows language code identifiers (LCIDs) used by
:func:`locale.getdefaultlocale` on Windows to protocol version 16.0
(2024-04-23).

..

.. date: 2023-02-26-14-07-18
.. gh-issue: 91099
.. nonce: _QPbEL
.. section: Library

:meth:`imaplib.IMAP4.login` now raises exceptions with :class:`str` instead
of :class:`bytes`. Patch by Florian Best.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-17-27-41
.. gh-issue: 150319
.. nonce: ol9tWK
.. section: Documentation

Generic builtin and standard library types now document the meaning of their
type parameters.

..

.. date: 2023-09-16-23-42-27
.. gh-issue: 109503
.. nonce: mZ-kdU
.. section: Documentation

Fix documentation for :func:`shutil.move` on usage of :func:`os.rename`
since nonatomic move might be used even if the files are on the same
filesystem. Patch by Fang Li

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-52-52
.. gh-issue: 151130
.. nonce: 1vslPH
.. section: Tests

Add more tests for ``PyWeakref_*`` C API.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-14-53-23
.. gh-issue: 149776
.. nonce: orqgsn
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket on Linux kernel 7.1 and newer: skip UDP Lite tests if it's
not supported. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-15-14-59
.. gh-issue: 148294
.. nonce: VtFaW4
.. section: Build

Corrected the use of ``AC_PATH_TOOL`` in ``configure.ac`` to allow a C++
compiler to be found on :envvar:`!PATH`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-40-48
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: JKVfme
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-33-51
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: ds-9f8
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-10-40-00
.. gh-issue: 150644
.. nonce: zLWyjj
.. section: macOS

When system logging is enabled (with ``config.use_system_logger``, messages
are now tagged as public. This allows the macOS 26 system logger to view
messages without special configuration.

..

.. date: 2025-10-14-00-17-48
.. gh-issue: 115119
.. nonce: 470I1N
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use libmpdecimal 4.0.1.

..

.. bpo: 6699
.. date: 2019-12-12-03-18-02
.. nonce: 1CqJFG
.. section: IDLE

Warn the user if a file will be overwritten when saving.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-14-26-17
.. gh-issue: 150907
.. nonce: CA91_B
.. section: C API

Fix ``dynamic_annotations.h`` header file when built with C++ and Valgrind:
add ``extern "C++" scope`` for the C++ template. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-02-25-13-37-10
.. gh-issue: 145235
.. nonce: -1ySNR
.. section: C API

Made :c:func:`PyDict_AddWatcher`, :c:func:`PyDict_ClearWatcher`,
:c:func:`PyDict_Watch`, and :c:func:`PyDict_Unwatch` thread-safe on the
:term:`free threaded <free threading>` build.
