.. date: 2025-12-01-09-36-45
.. gh-issue: 142145
.. nonce: tcAUhg
.. release date: 2025-12-05
.. section: Security

Remove quadratic behavior in ``xml.minidom`` node ID cache clearing.

..

.. date: 2024-05-23-11-44-41
.. gh-issue: 119452
.. nonce: PRfsSv
.. section: Security

Fix a potential memory denial of service in the :mod:`http.server` module.
When a malicious user is connected to the CGI server on Windows, it could
cause an arbitrary amount of memory to be allocated. This could have led to
symptoms including a :exc:`MemoryError`, swapping, out of memory (OOM)
killed processes or containers, or even system crashes.

..

.. date: 2025-12-05-17-58-29
.. gh-issue: 140797
.. nonce: YxB27u
.. section: Library

Revert changes to the undocumented :class:`!re.Scanner` class. Capturing
groups are still allowed for backward compatibility, although using them can
lead to incorrect result. They will be forbidden in future Python versions.

..

.. date: 2025-12-03-09-36-29
.. gh-issue: 142206
.. nonce: ilwegH
.. section: Library

The resource tracker in the :mod:`multiprocessing` module now uses the
original communication protocol, as in Python 3.14.0 and below, by default.
This avoids issues with upgrading Python while it is running. (Note that
such 'in-place' upgrades are not tested.) The tracker remains compatible
with subprocesses that use new protocol (that is, subprocesses using Python
3.13.10, 3.14.1 and 3.15).

..

.. date: 2025-12-03-06-12-39
.. gh-issue: 142214
.. nonce: appYNZ
.. section: Library

Fix two regressions in :mod:`dataclasses` in Python 3.14.1 related to
annotations.

* An exception is no longer raised if ``slots=True`` is used and the
  ``__init__`` method does not have an ``__annotate__`` attribute
  (likely because ``init=False`` was used).

* An exception is no longer raised if annotations are requested on the
  ``__init__`` method and one of the fields is not present in the class
  annotations. This can occur in certain dynamic scenarios.

Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2025-12-03-11-03-35
.. gh-issue: 142218
.. nonce: 44Fq_J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when inserting into a split table dictionary with a non
:class:`str` key that matches an existing key.

..

.. date: 2025-12-01-10-03-08
.. gh-issue: 116738
.. nonce: 972YsG
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`cmath` data race when initializing trigonometric tables with
subinterpreters.
