.. date: 2025-06-26-15-58-13
.. gh-issue: 135968
.. nonce: C4v_-W
.. release date: 2025-07-08
.. section: Tools/Demos

Stubs for ``strip`` are now provided as part of an iOS install.

..

.. date: 2025-06-25-10-36-22
.. gh-issue: 133600
.. nonce: bkdgHC
.. section: Tools/Demos

Backport file reorganization for Tools/wasm/wasi.

This should make backporting future code changes easier. It also simplifies
instructions around how to do WASI builds in the devguide.

..

.. date: 2025-06-26-15-15-35
.. gh-issue: 135966
.. nonce: EBpF8Y
.. section: Tests

The iOS testbed now handles the ``app_packages`` folder as a site directory.

..

.. date: 2025-06-19-15-29-38
.. gh-issue: 135494
.. nonce: FVl9a0
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest to support excluding tests from ``--pgo`` tests. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-06-27-21-23-19
.. gh-issue: 136053
.. nonce: QZxcee
.. section: Security

:mod:`marshal`: fix a possible crash when deserializing :class:`slice`
objects.

..

.. date: 2025-06-25-14-13-39
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: idjQ0B
.. section: Security

Fix parsing start and end tags in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according
to the HTML5 standard.

* Whitespaces no longer accepted between ``</`` and the tag name.
  E.g. ``</ script>`` does not end the script section.

* Vertical tabulation (``\v``) and non-ASCII whitespaces no longer recognized
  as whitespaces. The only whitespaces are ``\t\n\r\f`` and space.

* Null character (U+0000) no longer ends the tag name.

* Attributes and slashes after the tag name in end tags are now ignored,
  instead of terminating after the first ``>`` in quoted attribute value.
  E.g. ``</script/foo=">"/>``.

* Multiple slashes and whitespaces between the last attribute and closing ``>``
  are now ignored in both start and end tags. E.g. ``<a foo=bar/ //>``.

* Multiple ``=`` between attribute name and value are no longer collapsed.
  E.g. ``<a foo==bar>`` produces attribute "foo" with value "=bar".

* [Reverted in :gh:`136927`] Whitespaces between the ``=`` separator and attribute name or value are no
  longer ignored. E.g. ``<a foo =bar>`` produces two attributes "foo" and
  "=bar", both with value None; ``<a foo= bar>`` produces two attributes:
  "foo" with value "" and "bar" with value None.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-13-28-08
.. gh-issue: 102555
.. nonce: nADrzJ
.. section: Security

Fix comment parsing in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according to the
HTML5 standard. ``--!>`` now ends the comment. ``-- >`` no longer ends the
comment. Support abnormally ended empty comments ``<-->`` and ``<--->``.

..

.. date: 2025-07-05-09-45-04
.. gh-issue: 136286
.. nonce: N67Amr
.. section: Library

Fix pickling failures for protocols 0 and 1 for many objects realted to
subinterpreters.

..

.. date: 2025-07-05-06-56-16
.. gh-issue: 136316
.. nonce: 3zj_Do
.. section: Library

Improve support for evaluating nested forward references in
:func:`typing.evaluate_forward_ref`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-30-11-12-24
.. gh-issue: 85702
.. nonce: 0Lrbwu
.. section: Library

If ``zoneinfo._common.load_tzdata`` is given a package without a resource a
:exc:`zoneinfo.ZoneInfoNotFoundError` is raised rather than a
:exc:`PermissionError`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-06-27-13-34-28
.. gh-issue: 136028
.. nonce: RY727g
.. section: Library

Fix parsing month names containing "İ" (U+0130, LATIN CAPITAL LETTER I WITH
DOT ABOVE) in :func:`time.strptime`. This affects locales az_AZ, ber_DZ,
ber_MA and crh_UA.

..

.. date: 2025-06-26-17-28-49
.. gh-issue: 135995
.. nonce: pPrDCt
.. section: Library

In the palmos encoding, make byte ``0x9b`` decode to ``›`` (U+203A - SINGLE
RIGHT-POINTING ANGLE QUOTATION MARK).

..

.. date: 2025-06-26-11-52-40
.. gh-issue: 53203
.. nonce: TMigBr
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`time.strptime` for ``%c`` and ``%x`` formats on locales byn_ER,
wal_ET and lzh_TW, and for ``%X`` format on locales ar_SA, bg_BG and lzh_TW.

..

.. date: 2025-06-25-17-25-53
.. gh-issue: 91555
.. nonce: xUpTLD
.. section: Library

An earlier change, which was introduced in 3.14.0b2, has been reverted. It
disabled logging for a logger during handling of log messages for that
logger. Since the reversion, the behaviour should be as it was before
3.14.0b2.

..

.. date: 2025-06-24-14-43-24
.. gh-issue: 135878
.. nonce: Db4roX
.. section: Library

Fixes a crash of :class:`types.SimpleNamespace` on :term:`free threading`
builds, when several threads were calling its :meth:`~object.__repr__`
method at the same time.

..

.. date: 2025-06-24-10-52-35
.. gh-issue: 135836
.. nonce: s37351
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`IndexError` in :meth:`asyncio.loop.create_connection` that could
occur when non-\ :exc:`OSError` exception is raised during connection and
socket's ``close()`` raises :exc:`!OSError`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-23-11-04-25
.. gh-issue: 135836
.. nonce: -C-c4v
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`IndexError` in :meth:`asyncio.loop.create_connection` that could
occur when the Happy Eyeballs algorithm resulted in an empty exceptions list
during connection attempts.

..

.. date: 2025-06-23-10-19-11
.. gh-issue: 135855
.. nonce: -J0AGF
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`SystemError` when
:func:`!_interpreters.set___main___attrs` is passed a non-dict object. Patch
by Brian Schubert.

..

.. date: 2025-06-22-16-23-44
.. gh-issue: 135815
.. nonce: 0DandH
.. section: Library

:mod:`netrc`: skip security checks if :func:`os.getuid` is missing. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-06-22-02-16-17
.. gh-issue: 135640
.. nonce: FXyFL6
.. section: Library

Address bug where it was possible to call
:func:`xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree.write` on an ElementTree object
with an invalid root element. This behavior blanked the file passed to
``write`` if it already existed.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-13-58-13
.. gh-issue: 135645
.. nonce: 109nff
.. section: Library

Added ``supports_isolated_interpreters`` field to
:data:`sys.implementation`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-11-43-17
.. gh-issue: 135646
.. nonce: r7ekEn
.. section: Library

Raise consistent :exc:`NameError` exceptions in
:func:`annotationlib.ForwardRef.evaluate`

..

.. date: 2025-06-17-23-13-56
.. gh-issue: 135557
.. nonce: Bfcy4v
.. section: Library

Fix races on :mod:`heapq` updates and :class:`list` reads on the :term:`free
threaded <free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-06-17-22-44-19
.. gh-issue: 119180
.. nonce: Ogv8Nj
.. section: Library

Only fetch globals and locals if necessary in
:func:`annotationlib.get_annotations`

..

.. date: 2025-06-16-15-03-03
.. gh-issue: 135561
.. nonce: mJCN8D
.. section: Library

Fix a crash on DEBUG builds when an HACL* HMAC routine fails. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-06-14-12-06-55
.. gh-issue: 135487
.. nonce: KdVFff
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!reprlib.Repr.repr_int` when given integers with more than
:func:`sys.get_int_max_str_digits` digits. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-06-10-21-42-04
.. gh-issue: 135335
.. nonce: WnUqb_
.. section: Library

:mod:`multiprocessing`: Flush ``stdout`` and ``stderr`` after preloading
modules in the ``forkserver``.

..

.. date: 2025-06-03-12-59-17
.. gh-issue: 135069
.. nonce: xop30V
.. section: Library

Fix the "Invalid error handling" exception in
:class:`!encodings.idna.IncrementalDecoder` to correctly replace the
'errors' parameter.

..

.. date: 2025-06-02-14-36-28
.. gh-issue: 130662
.. nonce: Gpr2GB
.. section: Library

+Accept leading zeros in precision and width fields for
+:class:`~decimal.Decimal` formatting, for example ``format(Decimal(1.25),
'.016f')``.

..

.. date: 2025-06-02-14-28-30
.. gh-issue: 130662
.. nonce: EIgIR8
.. section: Library

Accept leading zeros in precision and width fields for
:class:`~fractions.Fraction` formatting, for example ``format(Fraction(1,
3), '.016f')``.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-10-20-16
.. gh-issue: 87790
.. nonce: X2SjJe
.. section: Library

Support underscore and comma as thousands separators in the fractional part
for :class:`~fractions.Fraction`'s formatting.  Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-09-53-54
.. gh-issue: 87790
.. nonce: 6nj3zQ
.. section: Library

Support underscore and comma as thousands separators in the fractional part
for :class:`~decimal.Decimal`'s formatting.  Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2025-03-11-05-24-14
.. gh-issue: 130664
.. nonce: g0yNMm
.. section: Library

Handle corner-case for :class:`~fractions.Fraction`'s formatting: treat
zero-padding (preceding the width field by a zero (``'0'``) character) as an
equivalent to a fill character of ``'0'`` with an alignment type of ``'='``,
just as in case of :class:`float`'s.

..

.. date: 2025-07-01-21-04-47
.. gh-issue: 136155
.. nonce: ufmH4Q
.. section: Documentation

EPUB builds are fixed by excluding non-XHTML-compatible tags.

..

.. date: 2025-07-06-14-53-19
.. gh-issue: 109700
.. nonce: KVNQQi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory error handling in :c:func:`PyDict_SetDefault`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-26-15-25-51
.. gh-issue: 78465
.. nonce: MbDN8X
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error message for ``cls.__new__(cls, ...)`` where ``cls`` is not
instantiable builtin or extension type (with ``tp_new`` set to ``NULL``).

..

.. date: 2025-06-24-06-41-47
.. gh-issue: 129958
.. nonce: EaJuS0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Differentiate between t-strings and f-strings in syntax error for newlines
in format specifiers of single-quoted interpolated strings.

..

.. date: 2025-06-23-18-08-32
.. gh-issue: 135871
.. nonce: 50C528
.. section: Core and Builtins

Non-blocking mutex lock attempts now return immediately when the lock is
busy instead of briefly spinning in the :term:`free threading` build.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-16-45-36
.. gh-issue: 135106
.. nonce: cpl6Aq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restrict the trashcan mechanism to GC'ed objects and untrack them while in
the trashcan to prevent the GC and trashcan mechanisms conflicting.

..

.. date: 2025-06-17-22-34-58
.. gh-issue: 135607
.. nonce: ucsLVu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential :mod:`weakref` races in an object's destructor on the
:term:`free threaded <free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-06-17-12-50-48
.. gh-issue: 135608
.. nonce: PnHckD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the JIT involving attributes of modules.

..

.. date: 2025-06-16-02-31-42
.. gh-issue: 135543
.. nonce: 6b0HOF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Emit ``sys.remote_exec`` audit event when :func:`sys.remote_exec` is called
and migrate ``remote_debugger_script`` to
``cpython.remote_debugger_script``.

..

.. date: 2025-05-31-19-24-54
.. gh-issue: 134280
.. nonce: NDVbzY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disable constant folding for ``~`` with a boolean argument. This moves the
deprecation warning from compile time to runtime.

..

.. date: 2025-06-25-01-03-10
.. gh-issue: 135906
.. nonce: UBrCWq
.. section: C API

Fix compilation errors when compiling the internal headers with a C++
compiler.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-18-09-20
.. gh-issue: 134273
.. nonce: ZAliyy
.. section: Build

Add support for configuring compiler flags for the JIT with ``CFLAGS_JIT``
