.. date: 2025-05-20-21-43-20
.. gh-issue: 130727
.. nonce: -69t4D
.. release date: 2025-05-26
.. section: Windows

Fix a race in internal calls into WMI that can result in an "invalid handle"
exception under high load. Patch by Chris Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-03-02-04
.. gh-issue: 76023
.. nonce: vHOf6M
.. section: Windows

Make :func:`os.path.realpath` ignore Windows error 1005 when in non-strict
mode.

..

.. date: 2025-05-13-13-25-27
.. gh-issue: 133779
.. nonce: -YcTBz
.. section: Windows

Reverts the change to generate different :file:`pyconfig.h` files based on
compiler settings, as it was frequently causing extension builds to break.
In particular, the ``Py_GIL_DISABLED`` preprocessor variable must now always
be defined explicitly when compiling for the experimental free-threaded
runtime. The :func:`sysconfig.get_config_var` function can be used to
determine whether the current runtime was compiled with that flag or not.

..

.. date: 2025-05-08-19-07-26
.. gh-issue: 133626
.. nonce: yFTKYK
.. section: Windows

Ensures packages are not accidentally bundled into the traditional
installer.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-14-57-46
.. gh-issue: 134215
.. nonce: sbdDK6
.. section: Tools/Demos

:term:`REPL` import autocomplete only suggests private modules when
explicitly specified.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-14-54-48
.. gh-issue: 133744
.. nonce: LCquu0
.. section: Tests

Fix multiprocessing interrupt test. Add an event to synchronize the parent
process with the child process: wait until the child process starts
sleeping. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-04-11-06
.. gh-issue: 133682
.. nonce: -_lwo3
.. section: Tests

Fixed test case ``test.test_annotationlib.TestStringFormat.test_displays``
which ensures proper handling of complex data structures (lists, sets,
dictionaries, and tuples) in string annotations.

..

.. date: 2025-05-08-15-06-01
.. gh-issue: 133639
.. nonce: 50-kbV
.. section: Tests

Fix ``TestPyReplAutoindent.test_auto_indent_default()`` doesn't run
``input_code``.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-20-22-54
.. gh-issue: 133767
.. nonce: kN2i3Q
.. section: Security

Fix use-after-free in the "unicode-escape" decoder with a non-"strict" error
handler.

..

.. date: 2025-01-14-11-19-07
.. gh-issue: 128840
.. nonce: M1doZW
.. section: Security

Short-circuit the processing of long IPv6 addresses early in
:mod:`ipaddress` to prevent excessive memory consumption and a minor
denial-of-service.

..

.. date: 2025-05-26-12-31-08
.. gh-issue: 132710
.. nonce: ApU3TZ
.. section: Library

If possible, ensure that :func:`uuid.getnode` returns the same result even
across different processes. Previously, the result was constant only within
the same process. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-05-24-03-10-36
.. gh-issue: 80334
.. nonce: z21cMa
.. section: Library

:func:`multiprocessing.freeze_support` now checks for work on any "spawn"
start method platform rather than only on Windows.

..

.. date: 2025-05-23-23-43-39
.. gh-issue: 134582
.. nonce: 9POq3l
.. section: Library

Fix tokenize.untokenize() round-trip errors related to t-strings braces
escaping

..

.. date: 2025-05-22-18-14-13
.. gh-issue: 134546
.. nonce: fjLVzK
.. section: Library

Ensure :mod:`pdb` remote debugging script is readable by remote Python
process.

..

.. date: 2025-05-22-14-12-53
.. gh-issue: 134451
.. nonce: M1rD-j
.. section: Library

Converted ``asyncio.tools.CycleFoundException`` from dataclass to a regular
exception type.

..

.. date: 2025-05-22-13-10-32
.. gh-issue: 114177
.. nonce: 3TYUJ3
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`asyncio` to not close subprocess pipes which would otherwise error
out when the event loop is already closed.

..

.. date: 2025-05-20-21-45-58
.. gh-issue: 90871
.. nonce: Gkvtp6
.. section: Library

Fixed an off by one error concerning the backlog parameter in
:meth:`~asyncio.loop.create_unix_server`. Contributed by Christian Harries.

..

.. date: 2025-05-20-19-16-30
.. gh-issue: 134323
.. nonce: ZQZGvw
.. section: Library

Fix the :meth:`threading.RLock.locked` method.

..

.. date: 2025-05-20-15-13-43
.. gh-issue: 86802
.. nonce: trF7TM
.. section: Library

Fixed asyncio memory leak in cancelled shield tasks. For shielded tasks
where the shield was cancelled, log potential exceptions through the
exception handler. Contributed by Christian Harries.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-20-59-06
.. gh-issue: 134209
.. nonce: anhTcF
.. section: Library

:mod:`curses`: The :meth:`curses.window.instr` and
:meth:`curses.window.getstr` methods now allocate their internal buffer on
the heap instead of the stack; in addition, the max buffer size is increased
from 1023 to 2047.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-15-05-24
.. gh-issue: 134235
.. nonce: pz9PwV
.. section: Library

Updated tab completion on REPL to include builtin modules. Contributed by
Tom Wang, Hunter Young

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-10-32-11
.. gh-issue: 134152
.. nonce: INJC2j
.. section: Library

Fixed :exc:`UnboundLocalError` that could occur during :mod:`email` header
parsing if an expected trailing delimiter is missing in some contexts.

..

.. date: 2025-05-18-13-23-29
.. gh-issue: 134168
.. nonce: hgx3Xg
.. section: Library

:mod:`http.server`: Fix IPv6 address binding and :option:`--directory
<http.server --directory>` handling when using HTTPS.

..

.. date: 2025-05-18-12-48-39
.. gh-issue: 62184
.. nonce: y11l10
.. section: Library

Remove import of C implementation of :class:`io.FileIO` from Python
implementation which has its own implementation

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-20-23-57
.. gh-issue: 133982
.. nonce: smS7au
.. section: Library

Emit :exc:`RuntimeWarning` in the Python implementation of :mod:`io` when
the :term:`file-like object <file object>` is not closed explicitly in the
presence of multiple I/O layers.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-18-08-35
.. gh-issue: 133890
.. nonce: onn9_X
.. section: Library

The :mod:`tarfile` module now handles :exc:`UnicodeEncodeError` in the same
way as :exc:`OSError` when cannot extract a member.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-13-46-20
.. gh-issue: 134097
.. nonce: fgkjE1
.. section: Library

Fix interaction of the new :term:`REPL` and :option:`-X showrefcount <-X>`
command line option.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-12-40-12
.. gh-issue: 133889
.. nonce: Eh-zO4
.. section: Library

The generated directory listing page in
:class:`http.server.SimpleHTTPRequestHandler` now only shows the decoded
path component of the requested URL, and not the query and fragment.

..

.. date: 2025-05-16-20-10-25
.. gh-issue: 134098
.. nonce: YyTkKr
.. section: Library

Fix handling paths that end with a percent-encoded slash (``%2f`` or
``%2F``) in :class:`http.server.SimpleHTTPRequestHandler`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-16-12-40-37
.. gh-issue: 132124
.. nonce: T_5Odx
.. section: Library

On POSIX-compliant systems, :func:`!multiprocessing.util.get_temp_dir` now
ignores :envvar:`TMPDIR` (and similar environment variables) if the path
length of ``AF_UNIX`` socket files exceeds the platform-specific maximum
length when using the :ref:`forkserver
<multiprocessing-start-method-forkserver>` start method. Patch by Bénédikt
Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-05-15-14-27-01
.. gh-issue: 134062
.. nonce: fRbJet
.. section: Library

:mod:`ipaddress`: fix collisions in :meth:`~object.__hash__` for
:class:`~ipaddress.IPv4Network` and :class:`~ipaddress.IPv6Network` objects.

..

.. date: 2025-05-13-18-54-56
.. gh-issue: 133970
.. nonce: 6G-Oi6
.. section: Library

Make :class:`!string.templatelib.Template` and
:class:`!string.templatelib.Interpolation` generic.

..

.. date: 2025-05-13-18-21-59
.. gh-issue: 71253
.. nonce: -3Sf_K
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`ValueError` in :func:`open` if *opener* returns a negative
file-descriptor in the Python implementation of :mod:`io` to match the C
implementation.

..

.. date: 2025-05-12-20-38-57
.. gh-issue: 133960
.. nonce: Aee79f
.. section: Library

Simplify and improve :func:`typing.evaluate_forward_ref`. It now no longer
raises errors on certain invalid types. In several situations, it is now
able to evaluate forward references that were previously unsupported.

..

.. date: 2025-05-12-06-52-10
.. gh-issue: 133925
.. nonce: elInBY
.. section: Library

Make the private class ``typing._UnionGenericAlias`` hashable.

..

.. date: 2025-05-10-12-06-55
.. gh-issue: 133653
.. nonce: Gb2aG4
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` with the *formatter_class* argument.
Fix TypeError when *formatter_class* is a custom subclass of
:class:`!HelpFormatter`. Fix TypeError when *formatter_class* is not a
subclass of :class:`!HelpFormatter` and non-standard *prefix_char* is used.
Fix support of colorizing when *formatter_class* is not a subclass of
:class:`!HelpFormatter`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-20-59-24
.. gh-issue: 132641
.. nonce: 3qTw44
.. section: Library

Fixed a race in :func:`functools.lru_cache` under free-threading.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-19-05-24
.. gh-issue: 133783
.. nonce: 1voCnR
.. section: Library

Fix bug with applying :func:`copy.replace` to :mod:`ast` objects. Attributes
that default to ``None`` were incorrectly treated as required for manually
created AST nodes.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-18-29-25
.. gh-issue: 133684
.. nonce: Y1DFSt
.. section: Library

Fix bug where :func:`annotationlib.get_annotations` would return the wrong
result for certain classes that are part of a class hierarchy where ``from
__future__ import annotations`` is used.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-15-50-00
.. gh-issue: 77057
.. nonce: fV8SU-
.. section: Library

Fix handling of invalid markup declarations in
:class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-09-10-34
.. gh-issue: 130328
.. nonce: s9h4By
.. section: Library

Speedup pasting in ``PyREPL`` on Windows in a legacy console. Patch by Chris
Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-08-49-03
.. gh-issue: 133701
.. nonce: KI8tGz
.. section: Library

Fix bug where :class:`typing.TypedDict` classes defined under ``from
__future__ import annotations`` and inheriting from another ``TypedDict``
had an incorrect ``__annotations__`` attribute.

..

.. date: 2025-05-07-19-16-41
.. gh-issue: 133581
.. nonce: kERUCJ
.. section: Library

Improve unparsing of t-strings in :func:`ast.unparse` and ``from __future__
import annotations``. Empty t-strings now round-trip correctly and
formatting in interpolations is preserved. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2025-05-06-22-54-37
.. gh-issue: 133551
.. nonce: rfy1tJ
.. section: Library

Support t-strings (:pep:`750`) in :mod:`annotationlib`. Patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2025-05-05-22-11-24
.. gh-issue: 133439
.. nonce: LpmyFz
.. section: Library

Fix dot commands with trailing spaces are mistaken for multi-line SQL
statements in the sqlite3 command-line interface.

..

.. date: 2025-05-04-17-04-55
.. gh-issue: 132493
.. nonce: huirKi
.. section: Library

Avoid accessing ``__annotations__`` unnecessarily in
:func:`inspect.signature`.

..

.. date: 2025-04-29-11-48-46
.. gh-issue: 132876
.. nonce: lyTQGZ
.. section: Library

``ldexp()`` on Windows doesn't round subnormal results before Windows 11,
but should.  Python's :func:`math.ldexp` wrapper now does round them, so
results may change slightly, in rare cases of very small results, on Windows
versions before 11.

..

.. date: 2025-04-26-15-50-12
.. gh-issue: 133009
.. nonce: etBuz5
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.__deepcopy__
<object.__deepcopy__>` when the element is concurrently mutated. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-30-16-42-38
.. gh-issue: 91555
.. nonce: ShVtwW
.. section: Library

Ignore log messages generated during handling of log messages, to avoid
deadlock or infinite recursion. [NOTE: This change has since been reverted.]

..

.. date: 2024-10-28-06-54-22
.. gh-issue: 125028
.. nonce: GEY8Ws
.. section: Library

:data:`functools.Placeholder` cannot be passed to :func:`functools.partial`
as a keyword argument.

..

.. date: 2023-02-13-21-56-38
.. gh-issue: 62824
.. nonce: CBZzX3
.. section: Library

Fix aliases for ``iso8859_8`` encoding. Patch by Dave Goncalves.

..

.. date: 2023-02-13-21-41-34
.. gh-issue: 86155
.. nonce: ppIGSC
.. section: Library

:meth:`html.parser.HTMLParser.close` no longer loses data when the
``<script>`` tag is not closed. Patch by Waylan Limberg.

..

.. date: 2022-07-24-20-56-32
.. gh-issue: 69426
.. nonce: unccw7
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` to not unescape character entities in
attribute values if they are followed by an ASCII alphanumeric or an equals
sign.

..

.. bpo: 28494
.. date: 2017-12-30-18-21-00
.. nonce: Dt_Wks
.. section: Library

Improve Zip file validation false positive rate in
:func:`zipfile.is_zipfile`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-22-14-48-19
.. gh-issue: 134381
.. nonce: 2BXhth
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`RuntimeError` when using a not-started :class:`threading.Thread`
after calling :func:`os.fork`

..

.. date: 2025-05-21-18-02-56
.. gh-issue: 127960
.. nonce: W3J_2X
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyREPL interactive shell no longer starts with ``__package__`` and
``__file__`` global names set to ``_pyrepl`` package internals. Contributed
by Yuichiro Tachibana.

..

.. date: 2025-05-21-15-14-32
.. gh-issue: 130397
.. nonce: aG6EON
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove special-casing for C stack depth limits for WASI. Due to
WebAssembly's built-in stack protection this does not pose a security
concern.

..

.. date: 2025-05-20-14-41-50
.. gh-issue: 128066
.. nonce: qzzGfv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes an edge case where PyREPL improperly threw an error when Python is
invoked on a read only filesystem while trying to write history file
entries.

..

.. date: 2025-05-18-14-33-23
.. gh-issue: 69605
.. nonce: ZMO49F
.. section: Core and Builtins

When auto-completing an import in the :term:`REPL`, finding no candidates
now issues no suggestion, rather than suggestions from the current
namespace.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-20-44-51
.. gh-issue: 134158
.. nonce: ewLNLp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix coloring of double braces in f-strings and t-strings in the
:term:`REPL`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-16-20-59-12
.. gh-issue: 134119
.. nonce: w8expI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when calling :func:`next` on an exhausted template string
iterator. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2025-05-16-17-25-52
.. gh-issue: 134100
.. nonce: 5-FbLK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free bug that occurs when an imported module isn't in
:data:`sys.modules` after its initial import. Patch by Nico-Posada.

..

.. date: 2025-05-15-11-38-16
.. gh-issue: 133999
.. nonce: uBZ8uS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`SyntaxError` regression in :keyword:`except` parsing after
:gh:`123440`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-11-13-40-42
.. gh-issue: 133886
.. nonce: ryBAyo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`sys.remote_exec` for non-ASCII paths in non-UTF-8 locales and
non-UTF-8 paths in UTF-8 locales.

..

.. date: 2025-05-10-17-12-27
.. gh-issue: 133703
.. nonce: bVM-re
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix hashtable in dict can be bigger than intended in some situations.

..

.. date: 2025-05-09-18-11-21
.. gh-issue: 133778
.. nonce: pWEV3t
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where assigning to the :attr:`~type.__annotations__` attributes of
classes defined under ``from __future__ import annotations`` had no effect.

..

.. date: 2025-05-08-13-48-02
.. gh-issue: 132762
.. nonce: tKbygC
.. section: Core and Builtins

:meth:`~dict.fromkeys` no longer loops forever when adding a small set of
keys to a large base dict. Patch by Angela Liss.

..

.. date: 2025-05-07-23-26-53
.. gh-issue: 133541
.. nonce: bHIC55
.. section: Core and Builtins

Inconsistent indentation in user input crashed the new REPL when syntax
highlighting was active. This is now fixed.

..

.. date: 2025-05-06-15-01-41
.. gh-issue: 133516
.. nonce: RqWVf2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise :exc:`ValueError` when constants ``True``, ``False`` or ``None`` are
used as an identifier after NFKC normalization.

..

.. date: 2025-04-19-17-16-46
.. gh-issue: 132542
.. nonce: 7T_TY_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update :attr:`Thread.native_id <threading.Thread.native_id>` after
:manpage:`fork(2)` to ensure accuracy. Patch by Noam Cohen.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-14-41-21
.. gh-issue: 134144
.. nonce: xVpZik
.. section: C API

Fix crash when calling :c:func:`Py_EndInterpreter` with a :term:`thread
state` that isn't the initial thread for the interpreter.

..

.. date: 2025-05-21-19-46-28
.. gh-issue: 134455
.. nonce: vdwlrq
.. section: Build

Fixed ``build-details.json`` generation to use the correct ``c_api.headers``
as defined in :pep:`739`, instead of ``c_api.include``.

..

.. date: 2025-04-30-10-22-08
.. gh-issue: 131769
.. nonce: H0oy5x
.. section: Build

Fix detecting when the build Python in a cross-build is a pydebug build.

..

.. date: 2025-04-16-09-38-48
.. gh-issue: 117088
.. nonce: EFt_5c
.. section: Build

AIX linker don't support -h option, so avoid it through platform check
