.. date: 2026-05-02-16-22-20
.. gh-issue: 149254
.. nonce: 9ozXB9
.. release date: 2026-05-04
.. section: Security

Update Android and iOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.20.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-17-49-58
.. gh-issue: 149017
.. nonce: EiVFPo
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.0.

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-13-46-30
.. gh-issue: 90309
.. nonce: srvj9q
.. section: Security

Base64-encode values when embedding cookies to JavaScript using the
:meth:`http.cookies.BaseCookie.js_output` method to avoid injection and
escaping.

..

.. date: 2026-04-20-15-31-37
.. gh-issue: 148808
.. nonce: _Z8JL0
.. section: Security

Added buffer boundary check when using ``nbytes`` parameter with
:meth:`!asyncio.AbstractEventLoop.sock_recvfrom_into`. Only relevant for
Windows and the :class:`asyncio.ProactorEventLoop`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-10-16-28-21
.. gh-issue: 148395
.. nonce: kfzm0G
.. section: Security

Fix a dangling input pointer in :class:`lzma.LZMADecompressor`,
:class:`bz2.BZ2Decompressor`, and internal :class:`!zlib._ZlibDecompressor`
when memory allocation fails with :exc:`MemoryError`, which could let a
subsequent :meth:`!decompress` call read or write through a stale pointer to
the already-released caller buffer.

..

.. date: 2026-03-31-09-15-51
.. gh-issue: 148169
.. nonce: EZJzz2
.. section: Security

A bypass in :mod:`webbrowser` allowed URLs prefixed with ``%action`` to pass
the dash-prefix safety check.

..

.. date: 2026-03-29-12-51-33
.. gh-issue: 146581
.. nonce: 4vZfB0
.. section: Security

Fix vulnerability in :func:`shutil.unpack_archive` for ZIP files on Windows
which allowed to write files outside of the destination tree if the patch in
the archive contains a Windows drive prefix. Now such invalid paths will be
skipped. Files containing ".." in the name (like "foo..bar") are no longer
skipped.

..

.. date: 2026-03-25-00-51-03
.. gh-issue: 146333
.. nonce: LqdL__bn
.. section: Security

Fix quadratic backtracking in :class:`configparser.RawConfigParser` option
parsing regexes (``OPTCRE`` and ``OPTCRE_NV``). A crafted configuration line
with many whitespace characters could cause excessive CPU usage.

..

.. date: 2026-03-20-09-29-42
.. gh-issue: 146211
.. nonce: PQVbs7
.. section: Security

Reject CR/LF characters in tunnel request headers for the
HTTPConnection.set_tunnel() method.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-14-06-00
.. gh-issue: 149122
.. nonce: P8k2Lm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in optimized calls to :func:`all`, :func:`any`, :func:`tuple`,
:func:`list`, and :func:`set` with an async generator expression argument
(for example, ``tuple(await x for x in y)``). These calls now correctly
raise ``TypeError`` instead of crashing.

..

.. date: 2026-04-22-14-55-18
.. gh-issue: 113956
.. nonce: 0VEXd6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race in :func:`sys.intern` in the free-threaded build when
interning a string owned by another thread. An interned copy owned by the
current thread is used instead when it is not safe to immortalize the
original.

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-14-36-44
.. gh-issue: 148820
.. nonce: XhOGhA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race in :c:type:`!_PyRawMutex` on the free-threaded build where a
``Py_PARK_INTR`` return from ``_PySemaphore_Wait`` could let the waiter
destroy its semaphore before the unlocking thread's ``_PySemaphore_Wakeup``
completed, causing a fatal ``ReleaseSemaphore`` error.

..

.. date: 2026-04-17-20-37-02
.. gh-issue: 148653
.. nonce: nbbHMh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Forbid :mod:`marshalling <marshal>` recursive code objects and
:class:`slice` objects which cannot be correctly unmarshalled.

..

.. date: 2026-04-17-11-30-00
.. gh-issue: 142516
.. nonce: GcGen315
.. section: Core and Builtins

Forward-port the generational cycle garbage collector to the default 3.14
build, replacing the incremental collector while leaving the free-threaded
collector unchanged.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-17-27-28
.. gh-issue: 148390
.. nonce: MAhw7F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an undefined behavior in :class:`memoryview` when using the native
boolean format (``?``) in :meth:`~memoryview.cast`. Previously, on some
common platforms, calling ``memoryview(b).cast("?").tolist()`` incorrectly
returned ``[False]`` instead of ``[True]`` for any even byte *b*. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-10-40-57
.. gh-issue: 148418
.. nonce: ggA1LZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible reference leak in a corrupted ``TYPE_CODE`` marshal stream.

..

.. date: 2026-04-11-17-28-52
.. gh-issue: 148393
.. nonce: lX6gwN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix data races between :c:func:`PyDict_Watch` / :c:func:`PyDict_Unwatch` and
concurrent dict mutation in the :term:`free-threaded build`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-10-14-20-54
.. gh-issue: 148284
.. nonce: HKs-S_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix high stack consumption in Python's interpreter loop on Clang 22 by
setting function limits for inlining when building with computed gotos.

..

.. date: 2026-04-09-14-18-33
.. gh-issue: 148037
.. nonce: aP3CSX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove critical section from :c:func:`!PyCode_Addr2Line` in free-threading.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-20-37-23
.. gh-issue: 148222
.. nonce: uF4D4E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix vectorcall support in :class:`types.GenericAlias` when the underlying
type does not support the vectorcall protocol. Fix possible leaks in
:class:`types.GenericAlias` and :class:`types.UnionType` in case of memory
error.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-20-21-44
.. gh-issue: 148208
.. nonce: JAxpDU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix recursion depth leak in :c:func:`PyObject_Print`

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-07-21-30
.. gh-issue: 137814
.. nonce: 6yRTeu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the ``__qualname__`` attribute of ``__annotate__`` functions on
functions.

..

.. date: 2026-04-02-13-25-09
.. gh-issue: 147998
.. nonce: wnzkRT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a memory leak in interpreter helper calls so cleanup works when an
operation falls across interpreter boundaries. Patch by Maurycy
Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-08-49-35
.. gh-issue: 146455
.. nonce: f54083a9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix O(N²) compile-time regression in constant folding after it was moved
from AST to CFG optimizer.

..

.. date: 2026-05-02-12-03-48
.. gh-issue: 149221
.. nonce: __KOks
.. section: Library

Catch rare math domain error for :func:`random.binomialvariate`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-16-11-27
.. gh-issue: 149117
.. nonce: yEeTYd
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`runpy.run_module` and :func:`runpy.run_path` to set the
:attr:`~ImportError.name` attribute on the :exc:`ImportError` they raise.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-14-33-42
.. gh-issue: 149148
.. nonce: EaiYvk
.. section: Library

:mod:`ensurepip`: Upgrade bundled pip to 26.1. This version fixes the
:cve:`2026-3219` vulnerability. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-22-34-09
.. gh-issue: 148093
.. nonce: 9pWceM
.. section: Library

Fix an out-of-bounds read of one byte in :func:`binascii.a2b_uu`. Raise
:exc:`binascii.Error`, instead of reading past the buffer end.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-17-12-11
.. gh-issue: 148914
.. nonce: i5C3kW
.. section: Library

Fix memoization of in-band :class:`~pickle.PickleBuffer` in the Python
implementation of :mod:`pickle`. Previously, identical
:class:`!PickleBuffer`\ s did not preserve identity, and empty writable
:class:`!PickleBuffer` memoized an empty bytearray object in place of
``b''``, so the following references to ``b''`` were unpickled as an empty
bytearray object.

..

.. date: 2026-04-23-21-47-49
.. gh-issue: 148947
.. nonce: W4V2lG
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :deco:`dataclasses.dataclass` with ``slots=True`` that occurred
when a function found within the class had an empty ``__class__`` cell.

..

.. date: 2026-04-23-07-38-04
.. gh-issue: 148680
.. nonce: ___ePl
.. section: Library

``ForwardRef`` objects that contain internal names to represent known
objects now show the ``type_repr`` of the known object rather than the
internal ``__annotationlib_name_x__`` name when evaluated as strings.

..

.. date: 2026-04-20-18-29-21
.. gh-issue: 148801
.. nonce: ROeNqs
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.__deepcopy__
<object.__deepcopy__>` on deeply nested trees.

..

.. date: 2026-04-18-21-39-15
.. gh-issue: 148735
.. nonce: siw6DG
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a use-after-free in
:meth:`Element.findtext <xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findtext>` when the
element tree is mutated concurrently during the search.

..

.. date: 2026-04-18-17-37-13
.. gh-issue: 148740
.. nonce: sYnFi0
.. section: Library

Fix usage for :mod:`uuid` command-line interface to support a custom
namespace be provided for uuid3 and uuid5.

..

.. date: 2026-04-16-13-30-00
.. gh-issue: 148651
.. nonce: ZsTdLk
.. section: Library

Fix reference leak in :class:`compression.zstd.ZstdDecompressor` when an
invalid option key is passed.

..

.. date: 2026-04-15-11-00-39
.. gh-issue: 146553
.. nonce: VGOsoP
.. section: Library

Fix infinite loop in :func:`typing.get_type_hints` when ``__wrapped__``
forms a cycle. Patch by Shamil Abdulaev.

..

.. date: 2026-04-14-09-04-35
.. gh-issue: 148508
.. nonce: -GiXml
.. section: Library

An intermittent timing error when running SSL tests on iOS has been
resolved.

..

.. date: 2026-04-13-15-59-44
.. gh-issue: 148518
.. nonce: RQdvsu
.. section: Library

If an email containing an address header that ended in an open double quote
was parsed with a non-``compat32`` policy, accessing the ``username``
attribute of the mailbox accessed through that header object would result in
an ``IndexError``. It now correctly returns an empty string as the result.

..

.. date: 2026-04-13-06-22-27
.. gh-issue: 148464
.. nonce: Bj_NZy
.. section: Library

Add missing ``__ctype_le/be__`` attributes for
:class:`~ctypes.c_float_complex` and :class:`~ctypes.c_double_complex`.
Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2026-04-12-16-40-11
.. gh-issue: 148370
.. nonce: 0Li2EK
.. section: Library

:mod:`configparser`: prevent quadratic behavior when a
:exc:`~configparser.ParsingError` is raised after a parser fails to parse
multiple lines. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-04-09-12-42-42
.. gh-issue: 148254
.. nonce: Xt7vKs
.. section: Library

Use singular "sec" instead of "secs" in :mod:`timeit` verbose output for
consistency with other time units.

..

.. date: 2026-04-07-14-13-40
.. gh-issue: 148192
.. nonce: 34AUYQ
.. section: Library

``email.generator.Generator._make_boundary`` could fail to detect a
duplicate boundary string if linesep was not \n. It now correctly detects
boundary strings when linesep is \r\n as well.

..

.. date: 2026-03-22-23-42-22
.. gh-issue: 146313
.. nonce: RtDeAd
.. section: Library

Fix a deadlock in :mod:`multiprocessing`'s resource tracker where the parent
process could hang indefinitely in :func:`os.waitpid` during interpreter
shutdown if a child created via :func:`os.fork` still held the resource
tracker's pipe open.

..

.. date: 2026-03-11-15-09-52
.. gh-issue: 145831
.. nonce: _sW94w
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`!email.quoprimime.decode` leaving a stray ``\r`` when
``eol='\r\n'`` by stripping the full *eol* string instead of one character.

..

.. date: 2026-02-22-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 145105
.. nonce: csv-reader-reentrant
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :mod:`csv` reader when iterating with a re-entrant iterator
that calls :func:`next` on the same reader from within ``__next__``.

..

.. date: 2026-01-19-21-23-18
.. gh-issue: 105936
.. nonce: dGrzjM
.. section: Library

Attempting to mutate non-field attributes of :mod:`dataclasses` with both
*frozen* and *slots* being ``True`` now raises
:class:`~dataclasses.FrozenInstanceError` instead of :class:`TypeError`.
Their non-dataclass subclasses can now freely mutate non-field attributes,
and the original non-slotted class can be garbage collected.

..

.. date: 2025-10-18-12-13-39
.. gh-issue: 140287
.. nonce: 49iU-4
.. section: Library

The :mod:`asyncio` REPL now handles exceptions when executing
:envvar:`PYTHONSTARTUP` scripts. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2025-04-17-15-26-35
.. gh-issue: 132631
.. nonce: IDFZfb
.. section: Library

Fix "I/O operation on closed file" when parsing JSON Lines file with
:mod:`JSON CLI <json.tool>`.

..

.. date: 2024-02-10-21-25-22
.. gh-issue: 70039
.. nonce: 6wvcAP
.. section: Library

Fixed bug where :meth:`smtplib.SMTP.starttls` could fail if
:meth:`smtplib.SMTP.connect` is called explicitly rather than implicitly.

..

.. date: 2023-09-08-13-10-32
.. gh-issue: 83281
.. nonce: 2Plpcj
.. section: Library

:mod:`email`: improve handling trailing garbage in address lists to avoid
throwing AttributeError in certain edge cases

..

.. date: 2026-04-17-02-28-55
.. gh-issue: 148663
.. nonce: MHIbRB
.. section: Documentation

Document that :class:`calendar.IllegalMonthError` is a subclass of both
:exc:`ValueError` and :exc:`IndexError` since Python 3.12.

..

.. date: 2026-04-02-07-20-00
.. gh-issue: 146646
.. nonce: GlobDoc1
.. section: Documentation

Document that :func:`glob.glob`, :func:`glob.iglob`,
:meth:`pathlib.Path.glob`, and :meth:`pathlib.Path.rglob` silently suppress
:exc:`OSError` exceptions raised from scanning the filesystem.

..

.. date: 2026-05-04-06-03-50
.. gh-issue: 149351
.. nonce: hN4sF0
.. section: Build

Avoid possible broken macOS framework install names when DESTDIR is
specified during builds.

..

.. date: 2026-04-30-08-43-47
.. gh-issue: 146475
.. nonce: 1cL4hX
.. section: Build

Block Apple Clang from being used to build the JIT as it ships without
required LLVM tools.

..

.. date: 2026-04-14-15-20-29
.. gh-issue: 148535
.. nonce: JjKiaa
.. section: Build

No longer use the ``gcc -fprofile-update=atomic`` flag on i686. The flag has
been added to fix a random GCC internal error on PGO build (:gh:`145801`)
caused by corruption of profile data (.gcda files). The problem is that it
makes the PGO build way slower (up to 47x slower) on i686. Since the GCC
internal error was not seen on i686 so far, don't use
``-fprofile-update=atomic`` on i686 anymore. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-03-21-18-51-31
.. gh-issue: 146264
.. nonce: Q9Ej4m
.. section: Build

Fix static module builds on non-WASI targets by linking HACL dependencies as
static libraries when ``MODULE_BUILDTYPE=static``, preventing duplicate
``_Py_LibHacl_*`` symbol errors at link time.

..

.. date: 2026-05-03-14-07-51
.. gh-issue: 149254
.. nonce: ENtMYD
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.20.

..

.. date: 2026-03-27-22-06-10
.. gh-issue: 146458
.. nonce: fYj0UQ
.. section: Windows

Fix incorrect REPL height and width tracking on console window resize on
Windows.

..

.. date: 2026-05-01-19-38-16
.. gh-issue: 149254
.. nonce: enO7uj
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.20.
