.. date: 2026-04-06-13-55-00
.. gh-issue: 148178
.. nonce: Rs7kLm
.. release date: 2026-05-10
.. section: Security

Hardened :mod:`!_remote_debugging` by validating remote debug offset tables
before using them to size memory reads or interpret remote layouts.

..

.. date: 2026-04-20-15-25-55
.. gh-issue: 146270
.. nonce: qZYfyc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a sequential consistency bug in ``structmember.c``.

..

.. date: 2025-08-01-20-31-30
.. gh-issue: 137293
.. nonce: 4x3JbV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`SystemError` when searching ELF Files in :func:`sys.remote_exec`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-21-58-17
.. gh-issue: 149388
.. nonce: DDBPeA
.. section: Library

Make :class:`!asyncio.windows_utils.PipeHandle` closing idempotent.

..

.. date: 2026-05-04-19-28-48
.. gh-issue: 149377
.. nonce: WNlc8Y
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 26.1.1

..

.. date: 2026-04-25-14-11-24
.. gh-issue: 138907
.. nonce: u21Wnh
.. section: Library

Support :rfc:`9309` in :mod:`urllib.robotparser`.

..

.. date: 2026-04-15-16-08-12
.. gh-issue: 148615
.. nonce: Uvx50R
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`pdb` to accept standard -- end of options separator. Reported by
haampie. Patched by Shrey Naithani.

..

.. date: 2026-02-19-04-40-57
.. gh-issue: 130750
.. nonce: 0hW52O
.. section: Library

Restore quoting of choices in :mod:`argparse` error messages for improved
clarity and consistency with documentation.

..

.. date: 2025-12-06-08-48-26
.. gh-issue: 141449
.. nonce: hQvNW_
.. section: Library

Improve tests and documentation for non-function callables as
:term:`annotate functions <annotate function>`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-05-18-49-44
.. gh-issue: 149425
.. nonce: QnQL8j
.. section: Tests

Increase time delta in
``test.test_zipfile.test_core.OtherTests.test_write_without_source_date_epoch``

..

.. date: 2026-05-05-17-08-36
.. gh-issue: 145736
.. nonce: JYdLx4
.. section: Tests

Fix test_tkinter test_configure_values test case backport miss for Tk 9.

..

.. date: 2026-05-06-18-23-36
.. gh-issue: 142295
.. nonce: O9RmZH
.. section: macOS

For Python macOS framework builds, update Info.plist files to be more
compliant with current Apple guidelines. Original patch contributed by
Martinus Verburg.

..

.. date: 2026-05-05-18-42-59
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: WmQG7S
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 9.0.3.
