.. date: 2025-07-05-15-10-42
.. gh-issue: 136251
.. nonce: GRM6o8
.. release date: 2025-07-22
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixes and usability improvements for ``Tools/wasm/emscripten/web_example``

..

.. date: 2025-07-21-14-15-25
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: nAxXw5
.. section: Security

Fix parsing attributes with whitespaces around the ``=`` separator in
:class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according to the HTML5 standard.

..

.. date: 2025-06-09-20-38-25
.. gh-issue: 118350
.. nonce: KgWCcP
.. section: Security

Fix support of escapable raw text mode (elements "textarea" and "title") in
:class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-21-22-35-50
.. gh-issue: 136170
.. nonce: QUlc78
.. section: Library

Removed the unreleased ``zipfile.ZipFile.data_offset`` property added in
3.14.0a7 as it wasn't fully clear which behavior it should have in some
situations so the result was not always what a user might expect.

..

.. date: 2025-07-21-16-10-24
.. gh-issue: 124621
.. nonce: wyoWc1
.. section: Library

pyrepl now works in Emscripten.

..

.. date: 2025-07-20-16-02-00
.. gh-issue: 136874
.. nonce: cLC3o1
.. section: Library

Discard URL query and fragment in :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-19-16-20-54
.. gh-issue: 130645
.. nonce: O-dYcN
.. section: Library

Enable color help by default in :mod:`argparse`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-11-23-04-39
.. gh-issue: 136549
.. nonce: oAi8u4
.. section: Library

Fix signature of :func:`threading.excepthook`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-11-03-39-15
.. gh-issue: 136523
.. nonce: s7caKL
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`wave.Wave_write` emitting an unraisable when open raises.

..

.. date: 2025-07-10-10-18-19
.. gh-issue: 52876
.. nonce: 9Vjrd8
.. section: Library

Add missing ``keepends`` (default ``True``) parameter to
:meth:`!codecs.StreamReaderWriter.readline` and
:meth:`!codecs.StreamReaderWriter.readlines`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-10-00-47-37
.. gh-issue: 136470
.. nonce: KlUEUG
.. section: Library

Correct :class:`concurrent.futures.InterpreterPoolExecutor`'s default thread
name.

..

.. date: 2025-07-09-20-29-30
.. gh-issue: 136476
.. nonce: HyLLzh
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that was causing the ``get_async_stack_trace`` function to miss
some frames in the stack trace.

..

.. date: 2025-07-08-20-58-01
.. gh-issue: 136434
.. nonce: uuJsjS
.. section: Library

Fix docs generation of ``UnboundItem`` in :mod:`concurrent.interpreters`
when running with :option:`-OO`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-07-22-12-32
.. gh-issue: 136380
.. nonce: 1b_nXl
.. section: Library

Raises :exc:`AttributeError` when accessing
:class:`concurrent.futures.InterpreterPoolExecutor` and subinterpreters are
not available.

..

.. date: 2025-06-28-11-32-57
.. gh-issue: 134759
.. nonce: AjjKcG
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`UnboundLocalError` in :func:`email.message.Message.get_payload`
when the payload to decode is a :class:`bytes` object. Patch by Kliment
Lamonov.

..

.. date: 2025-05-25-11-02-05
.. gh-issue: 134657
.. nonce: 3YFhR9
.. section: Library

:mod:`asyncio`: Remove some private names from ``asyncio.__all__``.

..

.. date: 2025-07-19-12-37-05
.. gh-issue: 136801
.. nonce: XU_tF2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix PyREPL syntax highlighting on match cases after multi-line case.
Contributed by Olga Matoula.

..

.. date: 2025-07-12-09-59-14
.. gh-issue: 136421
.. nonce: ZD1rNj
.. section: Library

Fix crash when initializing :mod:`datetime` concurrently.

..

.. date: 2025-07-11-13-45-48
.. gh-issue: 136541
.. nonce: uZ_-Ju
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix some issues with the perf trampolines on x86-64 and aarch64.  The
trampolines were not being generated correctly for some cases, which could
lead to the perf integration not working correctly. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2025-07-10-23-23-50
.. gh-issue: 136517
.. nonce: _NHJyv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a typo that prevented printing of uncollectable objects when the
:const:`gc.DEBUG_UNCOLLECTABLE` mode was set.

..

.. date: 2025-07-10-15-53-16
.. gh-issue: 136525
.. nonce: xAko0e
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix issue where per-thread bytecode was not instrumented for newly created
threads.

..

.. date: 2025-07-08-23-53-51
.. gh-issue: 132661
.. nonce: B84iYt
.. section: Core and Builtins

``Interpolation.expression`` now has a default, the empty string.

..

.. date: 2025-07-08-23-22-08
.. gh-issue: 132661
.. nonce: 34ftJl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reflect recent :pep:`750` change.

Disallow concatenation of ``string.templatelib.Template`` and :class:`str`.
Also, disallow implicit concatenation of t-string literals with string or
f-string literals.

..

.. date: 2025-06-12-00-03-34
.. gh-issue: 116738
.. nonce: iBBAdo
.. section: Library

Make functions in :mod:`grp` thread-safe on the :term:`free threaded <free
threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-06-06-02-24-42
.. gh-issue: 135148
.. nonce: r-t2sC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug where f-string debug expressions (using =) would incorrectly
strip out parts of strings containing escaped quotes and # characters. Patch
by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2025-06-03-21-06-22
.. gh-issue: 133136
.. nonce: Usnvri
.. section: Core and Builtins

Limit excess memory usage in the :term:`free threading` build when a large
dictionary or list is resized and accessed by multiple threads.

..

.. date: 2025-05-17-20-56-05
.. gh-issue: 91153
.. nonce: afgtG2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a :class:`bytearray` is concurrently mutated during item
assignment.

..

.. date: 2025-04-16-12-01-13
.. gh-issue: 127971
.. nonce: pMDOQ0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix off-by-one read beyond the end of a string in string search.

..

.. date: 2025-07-22-15-18-08
.. gh-issue: 112068
.. nonce: 4WvT-8
.. section: C API

Revert support of nullable arguments in :c:func:`PyArg_Parse`.

..

.. date: 2025-06-24-11-10-01
.. gh-issue: 133296
.. nonce: lIEuVJ
.. section: C API

New variants for the critical section API that accept one or two
:c:type:`PyMutex` pointers rather than :c:type:`PyObject` instances are now
public in the non-limited C API.

..

.. date: 2025-05-20-17-13-51
.. gh-issue: 134009
.. nonce: CpCmry
.. section: C API

Expose :c:func:`PyMutex_IsLocked` as part of the public C API.

..

.. date: 2025-07-18-17-15-00
.. gh-issue: 135621
.. nonce: 9cyCNb
.. section: Build

PyREPL no longer depends on the :mod:`curses` standard library. Contributed
by Łukasz Langa.
