.. date: 2025-04-06-23-39-47
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: 2JI7iE
.. release date: 2025-04-08
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 8.6.16.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-24-00
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: 4UcBKy
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.0.16. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-48
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: VmKQkv
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-13-22-55
.. gh-issue: 131423
.. nonce: vI-LqV
.. section: Windows

Update bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.0.16. The new build also disables
uplink support, which may be relevant to embedders but has no impact on
normal use.

..

.. date: 2025-03-19-21-58-16
.. gh-issue: 131453
.. nonce: qQ4J5H
.. section: Windows

Some :data:`!SND_*` and :data:`!MB_*` constants are added to
:mod:`winsound`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-19-01-11-56
.. gh-issue: 91349
.. nonce: pmtp-J
.. section: Windows

Replaces our copy of ``zlib`` with ``zlib-ng``, for performance improvements
in :mod:`zlib`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-21-45-31
.. gh-issue: 131025
.. nonce: hlS5EC
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to ship with SQLite 3.49.1.

..

.. date: 2025-04-05-14-52-36
.. gh-issue: 132121
.. nonce: QNoDih
.. section: Tools/Demos

Always escape non-printable Unicode characters in :program:`pygettext`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-29-16-20-00
.. gh-issue: 131852
.. nonce: afuefb
.. section: Tools/Demos

:program:`msgfmt` no longer adds the ``POT-Creation-Date`` to generated
``.mo`` files for consistency with GNU ``msgfmt``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-15-12-44-54
.. gh-issue: 131277
.. nonce: JaMlVa
.. section: Tests

Allow to unset one or more environment variables at once via
:meth:`EnvironmentVarGuard.unset()
<test.support.os_helper.EnvironmentVarGuard.unset>`. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-18-58-03
.. gh-issue: 131050
.. nonce: FMBAPN
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl.test_dh_params`` is skipped if the underlying TLS library does
not support finite-field ephemeral Diffie-Hellman.

..

.. date: 2025-04-07-04-11-08
.. gh-issue: 131809
.. nonce: 4MBDuy
.. section: Security

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.1

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-23-28-39
.. gh-issue: 131261
.. nonce: 0aB6nM
.. section: Security

Upgrade to libexpat 2.7.0

..

.. date: 2024-08-06-12-27-34
.. gh-issue: 121284
.. nonce: 8rwPxe
.. section: Security

Fix bug in the folding of rfc2047 encoded-words when flattening an email
message using a modern email policy. Previously when an encoded-word was too
long for a line, it would be decoded, split across lines, and re-encoded.
But commas and other special characters in the original text could be left
unencoded and unquoted. This could theoretically be used to spoof header
lines using a carefully constructed encoded-word if the resulting rendered
email was transmitted or re-parsed.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-16-08
.. gh-issue: 132174
.. nonce: dN4b-X
.. section: Library

Fix function name in error message of ``_interpreters.run_string``.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-23-09-21
.. gh-issue: 132171
.. nonce: zZqvfn
.. section: Library

Fix crash of ``_interpreters.run_string`` on string subclasses.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-19-25-12
.. gh-issue: 129204
.. nonce: sAVFO6
.. section: Library

Introduce new ``_PYTHON_SUBPROCESS_USE_POSIX_SPAWN`` environment variable
knob in :mod:`subprocess` to control the use of :func:`os.posix_spawn`.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-16-12-49
.. gh-issue: 132159
.. nonce: WvBfBm
.. section: Library

Do not shadow user arguments in generated :meth:`!__new__` by decorator
:class:`warnings.deprecated`. Patch by Xuehai Pan.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-13-23-41
.. gh-issue: 132168
.. nonce: 6UMEpo
.. section: Library

The :class:`ctypes.py_object` type now supports subscription, making it a
:term:`generic type`.

..

.. date: 2025-04-06-09-55-43
.. gh-issue: 84481
.. nonce: cX4yTn
.. section: Library

Add the :attr:`!zipfile.ZipFile.data_offset` attribute, which stores the
offset to the beginning of ZIP data in a file when available. When the
:class:`zipfile.ZipFile` is opened in either mode ``'w'`` or ``'x'`` and the
underlying file does not support ``tell()``, the value will be ``None``
instead.

..

.. date: 2025-04-04-16-22-03
.. gh-issue: 132075
.. nonce: qMM5np
.. section: Library

Fix possible use of :mod:`socket` address structures with uninitialized
members. Now all structure members are initialized with zeroes by default.

..

.. date: 2025-04-03-01-35-02
.. gh-issue: 118761
.. nonce: VQcj70
.. section: Library

Improve import times by up to 27x for the :mod:`string` module. Patch by
Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-16-01-12
.. gh-issue: 125434
.. nonce: EjPc7g
.. section: Library

Display thread name in :mod:`faulthandler`. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-11-31-15
.. gh-issue: 132002
.. nonce: TMsYvE
.. section: Library

Fix crash when deallocating :class:`contextvars.ContextVar` with weird
unahashable string names.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-13-44-26
.. gh-issue: 131938
.. nonce: dm4Suq
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: update the error message when an element to
remove via :meth:`Element.remove <xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.remove>` is
not found. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-11-16-22
.. gh-issue: 115942
.. nonce: 4W3hNx
.. section: Library

Add :meth:`threading.RLock.locked`, :meth:`multiprocessing.Lock.locked`,
:meth:`multiprocessing.RLock.locked`, and allow
:meth:`multiprocessing.managers.SyncManager.Lock` and
:meth:`multiprocessing.managers.SyncManager.RLock` to proxy ``locked()``
call.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-09-20-32
.. gh-issue: 131974
.. nonce: AIzshA
.. section: Library

Fix several thread-safety issues in :mod:`ctypes` on the :term:`free
threaded <free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-19-19-36
.. gh-issue: 118761
.. nonce: M0yFiZ
.. section: Library

Improve the import time of the :mod:`ast` module by extracting the
:func:`~ast.unparse` function to a helper module.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-02-06-57
.. gh-issue: 107369
.. nonce: 8M-HVz
.. section: Library

Improved performance of :func:`textwrap.indent` by an average of ~1.3x.
Patch by Adam Turner.

..

.. date: 2025-03-30-19-55-10
.. gh-issue: 131792
.. nonce: NNjzFA
.. section: Library

Improved performance of :func:`textwrap.dedent` by an average of ~2.4x,
(with improvements of up to 4x for large inputs), and fixed a bug where
blank lines with whitespace characters other than space or horizontal tab
were not normalised to the newline. Patch by Adam Turner, Marius Juston, and
Pieter Eendebak.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-11-26-31
.. gh-issue: 131668
.. nonce: tcS4xS
.. section: Library

:mod:`socket`: Fix code parsing AF_BLUETOOTH socket addresses.

..

.. date: 2025-03-23-18-39-07
.. gh-issue: 60115
.. nonce: AWdcmq
.. section: Library

Support frozen modules for :func:`linecache.getline`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-20-08-32-49
.. gh-issue: 131492
.. nonce: saC2cA
.. section: Library

Fix a resource leak when constructing a :class:`gzip.GzipFile` with a
filename fails, for example when passing an invalid ``compresslevel``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-19-20-37-07
.. gh-issue: 131435
.. nonce: y8KMae
.. section: Library

10-20% performance improvement of :func:`random.randint`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-19-14-36-54
.. gh-issue: 131461
.. nonce: uDUmdY
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`ResourceWarning` when constructing a :class:`gzip.GzipFile` in
write mode with a broken file object.

..

.. date: 2025-03-19-00-09-15
.. gh-issue: 125866
.. nonce: sIIJ5N
.. section: Library

Deprecate the :mod:`!nturl2path` module. Call
:func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` and :func:`~urllib.request.pathname2url`
instead.

..

.. date: 2025-03-18-19-52-49
.. gh-issue: 126367
.. nonce: PRxnuu
.. section: Library

Fix issue where :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname` raised :exc:`OSError`
when given a Windows URI containing a colon character not following a drive
letter, such as before an NTFS alternate data stream.

..

.. date: 2025-03-18-02-11-33
.. gh-issue: 120144
.. nonce: dBLFkI
.. section: Library

Disable ``CALL`` event in :mod:`bdb` in ``monitoring`` backend when we don't
need any new events on the code object to get a better performance.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-21-35-53
.. gh-issue: 131358
.. nonce: YVZ6yo
.. section: Library

Register ``cseuckr`` as an encoding alias for ``euc_kr``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-18-50-39
.. gh-issue: 131325
.. nonce: wlasMF
.. section: Library

Fix sendfile fallback implementation to drain data after writing to
transport in :mod:`asyncio`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-17-11-41
.. gh-issue: 90548
.. nonce: xSPf_L
.. section: Library

:func:`platform.libc_ver` can now detect and report the version of ``musl``
on Alpine Linux.

..

.. date: 2025-03-17-15-45-36
.. gh-issue: 129843
.. nonce: NPdpXL
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect argument passing in :func:`warnings.warn_explicit`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-16-18-30-00
.. gh-issue: 70647
.. nonce: 1qq2r3
.. section: Library

When creating a :mod:`datetime` object with an out of range date a more
informative error is raised.

..

.. date: 2025-03-16-08-00-29
.. gh-issue: 130914
.. nonce: 6z883_
.. section: Library

Allow :meth:`graphlib.TopologicalSorter.prepare` to be called more than once
as long as sorting has not started. Patch by Daniel Pope.

..

.. date: 2025-03-14-12-22-02
.. gh-issue: 131236
.. nonce: HjqFq0
.. section: Library

Allow to generate multiple UUIDs at once via :option:`python -m uuid --count
<uuid --count>`.

..

.. date: 2025-03-13-19-54-57
.. gh-issue: 126895
.. nonce: eJP9l0
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`readline` in :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-03-11-21-52-33
.. gh-issue: 121468
.. nonce: WsEP02
.. section: Library

``$_asynctask`` is added as a :mod:`pdb` convenience variable to access the
current asyncio task if applicable.

..

.. date: 2025-02-08-21-37-05
.. gh-issue: 118761
.. nonce: EtqxeB
.. section: Library

Improve import time of :mod:`locale` using lazy import ``re``. Patch by
Semyon Moroz.

..

.. date: 2025-02-03-16-27-14
.. gh-issue: 129598
.. nonce: 0js33I
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`ast.unparse` when :class:`ast.Interactive` contains multiple
statements.

..

.. date: 2025-02-02-00-30-09
.. gh-issue: 85162
.. nonce: BNF_aJ
.. section: Library

The :mod:`http.server` module now includes built-in support for HTTPS
servers exposed by :class:`http.server.HTTPSServer`. This functionality is
exposed by the command-line interface (``python -m http.server``) through
the ``--tls-cert``, ``--tls-key`` and ``--tls-password-file`` options. Patch
by Semyon Moroz.

..

.. date: 2025-01-29-21-29-46
.. gh-issue: 129463
.. nonce: qePexX
.. section: Library

The implementations of equality and hashing for
:class:`annotationlib.ForwardRef` now use all attributes on the object. Two
:class:`!ForwardRef` objects are equal only if all attributes are equal.

..

.. date: 2025-01-29-21-27-45
.. gh-issue: 128593
.. nonce: r3j4l-
.. section: Library

:class:`annotationlib.ForwardRef` objects no longer cache their value when
they are successfully evaluated. Successive calls to
:meth:`annotationlib.ForwardRef.evaluate` may return different values.

..

.. date: 2025-01-24-12-30-38
.. gh-issue: 117779
.. nonce: gADGXI
.. section: Library

Fix reading duplicated entries in :mod:`zipfile` by name. Reading duplicated
entries (except the last one) by ``ZipInfo`` now emits a warning instead of
raising an exception.

..

.. date: 2025-01-17-17-35-16
.. gh-issue: 128715
.. nonce: tQjo89
.. section: Library

The class of :class:`~ctypes.Structure`/:class:`~ctypes.Union` field
descriptors is now available as :class:`~ctypes.CField`, and has new
attributes to aid debugging and introspection.

..

.. date: 2024-12-18-15-51-09
.. gh-issue: 128055
.. nonce: 0c_Noq
.. section: Library

Fix ``test.test_sysconfig.test_sysconfigdata_json`` when running outside the
build directory (eg. after installing).

..

.. date: 2024-12-15-15-07-22
.. gh-issue: 126037
.. nonce: OyA7JP
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.find
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.find>`, :meth:`Element.findtext
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findtext>` and :meth:`Element.findall
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.findall>` when the tag to find implements an
:meth:`~object.__eq__` method mutating the element being queried. Patch by
Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-12-11-17-44-36
.. gh-issue: 127794
.. nonce: VwmRsp
.. section: Library

When headers are added to :class:`email.message.Message` objects, either
through :meth:`email.message.Message.__setitem__` or
:meth:`email.message.Message.add_header`, the field name is now validated
according to :rfc:`RFC 5322, Section 2.2 <5322#section-2.2>` and a
:exc:`ValueError` is raised if the field name contains any invalid
characters.

..

.. date: 2024-11-29-00-53-28
.. gh-issue: 123599
.. nonce: vyUh2S
.. section: Library

Deprecate :meth:`!pathlib.PurePath.as_uri`; use :meth:`pathlib.Path.as_uri`
instead.

..

.. date: 2024-10-29-12-59-45
.. gh-issue: 126033
.. nonce: sM3uCn
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree`: Fix a crash in :meth:`Element.remove
<xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.remove>` when the element is concurrently
mutated. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-09-25-18-45-03
.. gh-issue: 120144
.. nonce: JUcjLG
.. section: Library

Add the optional backend of ``sys.monitoring`` to :mod:`bdb` and use it for
:mod:`pdb`.

..

.. date: 2024-06-30-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 74598
.. nonce: 1gVy_8
.. section: Library

Add :func:`fnmatch.filterfalse` for excluding names matching a pattern.
Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2024-02-02-15-26-48
.. gh-issue: 114917
.. nonce: sf0GuO
.. section: Library

Add support for AI_NUMERICSERV in getaddrinfo emulation

..

.. bpo: 17254
.. date: 2019-08-05-13-58-10
.. nonce: 11xglZ
.. section: Library

Added aliases for Thai Language using Microsoft Code Pages.

..

.. date: 2025-03-18-15-15-16
.. gh-issue: 131417
.. nonce: lQg5aH
.. section: Documentation

Mention :class:`asyncio.Future` and :class:`asyncio.Task` in generic classes
list.

..

.. date: 2025-04-03-20-11-02
.. gh-issue: 131798
.. nonce: yhdUKW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow the JIT to remove an extra ``_TO_BOOL_BOOL`` instruction after
``_CONTAINS_OP_SET`` by setting the return type to bool.

..

.. date: 2025-04-02-17-47-14
.. gh-issue: 132011
.. nonce: dNh64H
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when calling :meth:`list.append` as an unbound method.

..

.. date: 2025-04-01-22-24-19
.. gh-issue: 131998
.. nonce: DvmZcT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when using an unbound method :term:`descriptor` object in a
function where a bound method descriptor was used.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-13-25-14
.. gh-issue: 131591
.. nonce: DsPKZt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement :pep:`768` (Safe external debugger interface for CPython). Add a
new :func:`sys.remote_exec` function to the :mod:`sys` module. This function
schedules the execution of a Python file in a separate process. Patch by
Pablo Galindo, Matt Wozniski and Ivona Stojanovic.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-19-02-55
.. gh-issue: 131798
.. nonce: fNZ5-2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow JIT to omit str guard in truthiness test when str type is known.

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-18-59-24
.. gh-issue: 131833
.. nonce: v4WvWT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add support for optionally dropping grouping parentheses when using multiple
exception types as per :pep:`758`. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. date: 2025-03-28-07-39-10
.. gh-issue: 130924
.. nonce: l2Rbmj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Usage of a name in a function-scope annotation no longer triggers creation
of a cell for that variable. This fixes a regression in earlier alphas of
Python 3.14.

..

.. date: 2025-03-27-12-40-21
.. gh-issue: 131800
.. nonce: Xq3n54
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve the experimental JIT's ability to remove type checks for certain
subscripting operations.

..

.. date: 2025-03-25-20-38-06
.. gh-issue: 131738
.. nonce: eCb0OQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Compiler emits optimized code for builtin any/all/tuple calls over a
generator expression.

..

.. date: 2025-03-25-13-58-25
.. gh-issue: 131719
.. nonce: zKv98a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing NULL check in ``_PyMem_FreeDelayed`` in :term:`free-threaded
<free threading>` build.

..

.. date: 2025-03-24-19-38-53
.. gh-issue: 131670
.. nonce: IffOZj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`anext` failing on sync :meth:`~object.__anext__` raising an
exception.

..

.. date: 2025-03-24-14-56-00
.. gh-issue: 131666
.. nonce: q0-a-b
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix signature of ``anext_awaitable.close`` objects. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-03-20-03-45-20
.. gh-issue: 130415
.. nonce: VtJhoG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize comparison of two constants in JIT builds

..

.. date: 2025-03-13-20-23-02
.. gh-issue: 129149
.. nonce: z42wkm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add fast path for small and medium-size integers in
:c:func:`PyLong_FromInt32`, :c:func:`PyLong_FromUInt32`,
:c:func:`PyLong_FromInt64` and :c:func:`PyLong_FromUInt64`. Patch by Chris
Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-12-08-57
.. gh-issue: 130887
.. nonce: f823Ih
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize the AArch64 code generation for the JIT. Patch by Diego Russo

..

.. date: 2025-03-10-12-05-45
.. gh-issue: 130956
.. nonce: f823Ih
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize the AArch64 code generation for the JIT. Patch by Diego Russo

..

.. date: 2025-03-09-09-03-24
.. gh-issue: 130928
.. nonce: gP1yKv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error message when formatting bytes using the ``'i'`` flag. Patch by
Maxim Ageev.

..

.. date: 2025-03-06-17-04-27
.. gh-issue: 130935
.. nonce: ss4lmS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Annotations at the class and module level that are conditionally defined are
now only reflected in ``__annotations__`` if the block they are in is
executed. Patch by Jelle Zijlstra.

..

.. date: 2025-03-03-20-02-45
.. gh-issue: 130775
.. nonce: fEM6T-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not crash on negative ``column`` and ``end_column`` in :mod:`ast`
locations.

..

.. date: 2025-02-28-11-29-35
.. gh-issue: 130704
.. nonce: 7RDVLE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize ``LOAD_FAST`` and its superinstruction form to reduce reference
counting overhead. These instructions are replaced with faster variants that
load borrowed references onto the operand stack when we can prove that the
reference in the frame outlives the reference loaded onto the stack.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-14-47-46
.. gh-issue: 88887
.. nonce: V3U0CV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixing multiprocessing Resource Tracker process leaking, usually observed
when running Python as PID 1.

..

.. date: 2025-02-21-00-12-24
.. gh-issue: 130115
.. nonce: mF-rP6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue with thread identifiers being sign-extended on some platforms.

..

.. date: 2025-02-15-14-36-32
.. gh-issue: 99108
.. nonce: u6CfmK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add support for built-in implementation of HMAC (:rfc:`2104`) based on
HACL*. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-02-13-19-07-54
.. gh-issue: 130080
.. nonce: IoJpuy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 765: Disallow return/break/continue that exit a finally block.

..

.. date: 2025-02-09-09-54-37
.. gh-issue: 129900
.. nonce: GAGGPn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix return codes inside :exc:`SystemExit` not getting returned by the REPL.

..

.. date: 2025-01-11-20-11-28
.. gh-issue: 128632
.. nonce: ryhnKs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallow ``__classdict__`` as the name of a type parameter. Using this name
would previously crash the interpreter in some circumstances.

..

.. date: 2025-01-09-22-12-03
.. gh-issue: 126703
.. nonce: 6rAxZ7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve performance of builtin methods by using a freelist.

..

.. date: 2025-01-08-09-41-25
.. gh-issue: 126703
.. nonce: djs9e_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve performance of  :class:`range` by using a freelist.

..

.. date: 2025-03-26-06-56-40
.. gh-issue: 131740
.. nonce: 9PdxxQ
.. section: C API

Update PyUnstable_GC_VisitObjects to traverse perm gen.

..

.. date: 2025-03-20-17-14-29
.. gh-issue: 131525
.. nonce: n8Di6a
.. section: C API

The PyTupleObject now caches the computed hash value in the new field
ob_hash.

..

.. date: 2025-03-31-19-22-41
.. gh-issue: 131865
.. nonce: PIJy7X
.. section: Build

The DTrace build now properly passes the ``CC`` and ``CFLAGS`` variables to
the ``dtrace`` command when utilizing SystemTap on Linux.

..

.. date: 2025-03-27-01-21-50
.. gh-issue: 131675
.. nonce: l2zfOO
.. section: Build

Fix mimalloc library builds for 32-bit ARM targets.

..

.. date: 2025-03-25-19-14-24
.. gh-issue: 131691
.. nonce: 2BgHU5
.. section: Build

clang-cl on Windows needs option ``/EHa`` to support SEH (structured
exception handling) correctly. Fix by Chris Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-03-15-12-32-56
.. gh-issue: 131278
.. nonce: 1nd0mJ
.. section: Build

Add optimizing flag ``WITH_COMPUTED_GOTOS`` to Windows builds for when using
a compiler that supports it (currently clang-cl). Patch by Chris Eibl.

..

.. date: 2025-03-11-19-06-50
.. gh-issue: 130213
.. nonce: _eQr0g
.. section: Build

Update the vendored HACL* library to fix build issues with older clang
compilers.

..

.. date: 2025-03-06-20-55-34
.. gh-issue: 130673
.. nonce: T3RSCI
.. section: Build

Fix potential ``KeyError`` when handling object sections during JIT building
process.
