.. date: 2025-08-06-06-29-12
.. gh-issue: 137450
.. nonce: JZypb7
.. release date: 2025-08-14
.. section: macOS

macOS installer shell path management improvements: separate the installer
``Shell profile updater`` postinstall script from the ``Update Shell
Profile.command`` to enable more robust error handling.

..

.. date: 2025-07-27-02-17-40
.. gh-issue: 137134
.. nonce: pjgITs
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to ship with SQLite version 3.50.4.

..

.. date: 2025-07-27-02-16-53
.. gh-issue: 137134
.. nonce: W0WpDF
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to ship with SQLite 3.50.4.

..

.. date: 2025-08-08-15-00-38
.. gh-issue: 137426
.. nonce: lW-Rk2
.. section: Library

Remove the code deprecation of ``importlib.abc.ResourceLoader``. It is
documented as deprecated, but left for backwards compatibility with other
classes in ``importlib.abc``.

..

.. date: 2025-07-31-10-31-56
.. gh-issue: 137282
.. nonce: GOCwIC
.. section: Library

Fix tab completion and :func:`dir` on :mod:`concurrent.futures`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-30-18-07-33
.. gh-issue: 137257
.. nonce: XBtzf2
.. section: Library

Bump the version of pip bundled in ensurepip to version 25.2

..

.. date: 2025-07-29-21-18-31
.. gh-issue: 137226
.. nonce: B_4lpu
.. section: Library

Fix behavior of :meth:`annotationlib.ForwardRef.evaluate` when the
*type_params* parameter is passed and the name of a type param is also
present in an enclosing scope.

..

.. date: 2025-07-25-09-21-56
.. gh-issue: 130522
.. nonce: Crwq68
.. section: Library

Fix unraisable :exc:`TypeError` raised during :term:`interpreter shutdown`
in the :mod:`threading` module.

..

.. date: 2025-07-24-00-38-07
.. gh-issue: 137059
.. nonce: fr64oW
.. section: Library

Fix handling of file URLs with a Windows drive letter in the URL authority
by :func:`urllib.request.url2pathname`. This fixes a regression in earlier
pre-releases of Python 3.14.

..

.. date: 2025-07-23-00-35-29
.. gh-issue: 130577
.. nonce: c7EITy
.. section: Library

:mod:`tarfile` now validates archives to ensure member offsets are
non-negative.  (Contributed by Alexander Enrique Urieles Nieto in
:gh:`130577`.)

..

.. date: 2025-07-20-16-56-55
.. gh-issue: 135228
.. nonce: n_XIao
.. section: Library

When :mod:`dataclasses` replaces a class with a slotted dataclass, the
original class can now be garbage collected again. Earlier changes in Python
3.14 caused this class to always remain in existence together with the
replacement class synthesized by :mod:`dataclasses`.

..

.. date: 2025-07-01-23-00-58
.. gh-issue: 136155
.. nonce: 4siQQO
.. section: Documentation

We are now checking for fatal errors in EPUB builds in CI.

..

.. date: 2025-08-06-15-39-54
.. gh-issue: 137400
.. nonce: xIw0zs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the :term:`free threading` build when disabling profiling or
tracing across all threads with :c:func:`PyEval_SetProfileAllThreads` or
:c:func:`PyEval_SetTraceAllThreads` or their Python equivalents
:func:`threading.settrace_all_threads` and
:func:`threading.setprofile_all_threads`.

..

.. date: 2025-08-02-23-04-57
.. gh-issue: 137314
.. nonce: wjEdzD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a regression where raw f-strings incorrectly interpreted escape
sequences in format specifications. Raw f-strings now properly preserve
literal backslashes in format specs, matching the behavior from Python 3.11.
For example, ``rf"{obj:\xFF}"`` now correctly produces ``'\\xFF'`` instead
of ``'ÿ'``. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2025-08-02-10-27-53
.. gh-issue: 137308
.. nonce: at05p_
.. section: Core and Builtins

A standalone docstring in a node body is optimized as a :keyword:`pass`
statement to ensure that the node's body is never empty. There was a
:exc:`ValueError` in :func:`compile` otherwise.

..

.. date: 2025-08-01-18-54-31
.. gh-issue: 137288
.. nonce: FhE7ku
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bug where some bytecode instructions of a boolean expression are not
associated with the correct exception handler.

..

.. date: 2025-07-28-19-11-34
.. gh-issue: 134291
.. nonce: IiB9Id
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove some newer macOS API usage from the JIT compiler in order to restore
compatibility with older OSX 10.15 deployment targets.

..

.. date: 2025-07-25-22-31-52
.. gh-issue: 131338
.. nonce: zJDCMp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disable computed stack limit checks on non-glibc linux platforms to fix
crashes on deep recursion.

..

.. date: 2025-07-24-17-30-58
.. gh-issue: 136870
.. nonce: ncx82J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix data races while de-instrumenting bytecode of code objects running
concurrently in threads.

..

.. date: 2025-08-13-13-41-04
.. gh-issue: 137573
.. nonce: r6uwRf
.. section: C API

Mark ``_PyOptimizer_Optimize`` as :c:macro:`Py_NO_INLINE` to prevent stack
overflow crashes on macOS.

..

.. date: 2025-08-13-12-10-12
.. gh-issue: 132339
.. nonce: 3Czz5y
.. section: Build

Add support for OpenSSL 3.5.
