.. date: 2025-09-15-15-34-29
.. gh-issue: 138896
.. nonce: lkiF_7
.. release date: 2025-09-18
.. section: Windows

Fix error installing C runtime on non-updated Windows machines

..

.. date: 2025-08-21-14-04-50
.. gh-issue: 137873
.. nonce: qxffLt
.. section: Tools/Demos

The iOS test runner has been simplified, resolving some issues that have
been observed using the runner in GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines test
environments.

..

.. date: 2025-06-18-13-34-55
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: NZlpWf
.. section: Security

Fix CDATA section parsing in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser` according to
the HTML5 standard: ``] ]>`` and ``]] >`` no longer end the CDATA section.
Add private method ``_set_support_cdata()`` which can be used to specify how
to parse ``<[CDATA[`` --- as a CDATA section in foreign content (SVG or
MathML) or as a bogus comment in the HTML namespace.

..

.. date: 2025-09-16-19-05-29
.. gh-issue: 138998
.. nonce: URl0Y_
.. section: Library

Update bundled libexpat to 2.7.2

..

.. date: 2025-09-16-15-56-29
.. gh-issue: 118803
.. nonce: aOPtmL
.. section: Library

Add back :class:`collections.abc.ByteString` and :class:`typing.ByteString`.
Both had been removed in prior alpha, beta and release candidates for Python
3.14, but their removal has now been postponed to Python 3.17.

..

.. date: 2025-09-15-13-09-19
.. gh-issue: 137226
.. nonce: HH3_ik
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`typing.get_type_hints` calls on generic :class:`typing.TypedDict`
classes defined with string annotations.

..

.. date: 2025-09-12-01-01-05
.. gh-issue: 138804
.. nonce: 46ZukT
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`AttributeError` when an argument of
incorrect type is passed to :func:`shlex.quote`. This restores the behavior
of the function prior to 3.14.

..

.. date: 2025-09-10-10-02-59
.. gh-issue: 128636
.. nonce: ldRKGZ
.. section: Library

Fix crash in PyREPL when os.environ is overwritten with an invalid value for
mac

..

.. date: 2025-09-06-11-26-21
.. gh-issue: 138514
.. nonce: 66ltOb
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`ValueError` when a multi-character string is passed to the
*echo_char* parameter of :func:`getpass.getpass`. Patch by Benjamin Johnson.

..

.. date: 2025-09-05-07-50-18
.. gh-issue: 138515
.. nonce: E3M-pu
.. section: Library

:mod:`email` is added to Emscripten build.

..

.. date: 2025-09-05-05-53-43
.. gh-issue: 99948
.. nonce: KMSlG6
.. section: Library

:func:`ctypes.util.find_library` now works in Emscripten build.

..

.. date: 2025-08-30-10-58-15
.. gh-issue: 138253
.. nonce: 9Ehj-N
.. section: Library

Add the *block* parameter in the :meth:`!put` and :meth:`!get` methods of
the :mod:`concurrent.interpreters` queues for compatibility with the
:class:`queue.Queue` interface.

..

.. date: 2025-08-25-18-06-04
.. gh-issue: 138133
.. nonce: Zh9rGo
.. section: Library

Prevent infinite traceback loop when sending CTRL^C to Python through
``strace``.

..

.. date: 2025-08-18-16-02-51
.. gh-issue: 134869
.. nonce: GnAjnU
.. section: Library

Fix an issue where pressing Ctrl+C during tab completion in the REPL would
leave the autocompletion menu in a corrupted state.

..

.. date: 2025-08-16-18-11-41
.. gh-issue: 90548
.. nonce: q3aJUK
.. section: Library

Fix ``musl`` detection for :func:`platform.libc_ver` on Alpine Linux if
compiled with --strip-all.

..

.. date: 2025-07-13-13-31-22
.. gh-issue: 136134
.. nonce: mh6VjS
.. section: Library

:meth:`!SMTP.auth_cram_md5` now raises an :exc:`~smtplib.SMTPException`
instead of a :exc:`ValueError` if Python has been built without MD5 support.
In particular, :class:`~smtplib.SMTP` clients will not attempt to use this
method even if the remote server is assumed to support it. Patch by Bénédikt
Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-07-13-11-20-05
.. gh-issue: 136134
.. nonce: xhh0Kq
.. section: Library

:meth:`IMAP4.login_cram_md5 <imaplib.IMAP4.login_cram_md5>` now raises an
:exc:`IMAP4.error <imaplib.IMAP4.error>` if CRAM-MD5 authentication is not
supported. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2025-06-01-11-14-00
.. gh-issue: 134953
.. nonce: ashdfs
.. section: Library

Expand ``_colorize`` theme with ``keyword_constant`` and implement in
:term:`repl`.

..

.. date: 2025-09-10-14-53-59
.. gh-issue: 71810
.. nonce: ppf0J-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise :exc:`OverflowError` for ``(-1).to_bytes()`` for signed conversions
when bytes count is zero.  Patch by Sergey B Kirpichev.

..

.. date: 2025-09-05-01-19-04
.. gh-issue: 138192
.. nonce: erluq5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :mod:`contextvars` initialization so that all subinterpreters are
assigned the :attr:`~contextvars.Token.MISSING` value.

..

.. date: 2025-09-03-17-00-30
.. gh-issue: 138479
.. nonce: qUxgWs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a generic object's ``__typing_subst__`` returns an object
that isn't a :class:`tuple`.

..

.. date: 2025-09-02-09-10-06
.. gh-issue: 138372
.. nonce: h1Xk4-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`SyntaxWarning` emitted for erroneous subscript expressions
involving :ref:`template string literals <t-strings>`. Patch by Brian
Schubert.

..

.. date: 2025-09-01-16-09-02
.. gh-issue: 138318
.. nonce: t-WEN5
.. section: Core and Builtins

The default REPL now avoids highlighting built-in names (for instance
:class:`set` or :func:`format`) when they are used as attribute names (for
instance in ``value.set`` or ``text.format``).

..

.. date: 2025-09-01-13-54-43
.. gh-issue: 138349
.. nonce: 0fGmAi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash in certain cases where a module contains both a module-level
annotation and a comprehension.

..

.. date: 2025-08-22-11-39-40
.. gh-issue: 137384
.. nonce: j4b_in
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when using the :mod:`warnings` module in a finalizer at
shutdown. Patch by Kumar Aditya.

..

.. date: 2025-08-17-13-36-53
.. gh-issue: 137883
.. nonce: 55VDCN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix runaway recursion when calling a function with keyword arguments.

..

.. date: 2025-08-15-15-45-26
.. gh-issue: 137079
.. nonce: YEow69
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix keyword typo recognition when parsing files. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. date: 2025-08-14-14-18-29
.. gh-issue: 137728
.. nonce: HdYS9R
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the JIT's handling of many local variables. This previously caused a
segfault.

..

.. date: 2025-08-10-21-34-12
.. gh-issue: 137576
.. nonce: 0ZicS-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix for incorrect source code being shown in tracebacks from the Basic REPL
when :envvar:`PYTHONSTARTUP` is given. Patch by Adam Hartz.
