.. date: 2026-05-11-21-15-07
.. gh-issue: 149698
.. nonce: OudOcW
.. release date: 2026-06-02
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.1
for the fix for :cve:`2026-45186`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-18-05-32
.. gh-issue: 87451
.. nonce: XkKB6M
.. section: Security

The :mod:`ftplib` module's undocumented ``ftpcp`` function no longer trusts
the IPv4 address value returned from the source server in response to the
``PASV`` command by default, completing the fix for CVE-2021-4189.  As with
:class:`ftplib.FTP`, the former behavior can be re-enabled by setting the
``trust_server_pasv_ipv4_address`` attribute on the source
:class:`ftplib.FTP` instance to ``True``.  Thanks to Qi Deng at Aurascape AI
for the report.

..

.. date: 2026-05-08-02-18-54
.. gh-issue: 149474
.. nonce: ujQ-mu
.. section: Security

Fix the binary writer in :mod:`profiling.sampling` not firing the audit
(:pep:`578`) when creating the output file. The writer and the reader now
accept any path-like object. Patch by Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-05-03-21-00-00
.. gh-issue: 149486
.. nonce: tarflt
.. section: Security

:func:`tarfile.data_filter` now validates link targets using the same
normalised value that is written to disk, strips trailing separators from
the member name when resolving a symlink's directory, and rejects link
members that would replace the destination directory itself. This closes
several path-traversal bypasses of the ``data`` extraction filter.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-16-36-11
.. gh-issue: 149079
.. nonce: vKl-LM
.. section: Security

Fix a potential denial of service in :func:`unicodedata.normalize`. The
canonical ordering step of Unicode normalization used a quadratic-time
insertion sort for reordering combining characters, which could be exploited
with crafted input containing many combining characters in non-canonical
order. Replaced with a linear-time counting sort for long runs.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-19-30-45
.. gh-issue: 149018
.. nonce: a9SqWb
.. section: Security

Improved protection against XML hash-flooding attacks in
:mod:`xml.parsers.expat` and :mod:`xml.etree.ElementTree` when Python is
compiled with libExpat 2.8.0 or later.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-16-00-22
.. gh-issue: 150374
.. nonce: Emu6d8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix double release of the import lock on lazy import reification errors.

..

.. date: 2026-05-24-14-45-00
.. gh-issue: 149156
.. nonce: NP73rB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an intermittent crash after :func:`os.fork` when perf trampoline
profiling is enabled and the child returns through trampoline frames
inherited from the parent process.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-22-08-01
.. gh-issue: 149449
.. nonce: 2lhQFF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free crash when the :mod:`unicodedata` module was removed
from :data:`sys.modules` and garbage-collected between calls that decode
``\N{...}`` escapes or use the ``namereplace`` codec error handler.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-17-09-28
.. gh-issue: 150107
.. nonce: GD72-D
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`asyncio`: ``sendfile()`` and ``sock_sendfile()`` event loop methods
now call ``file.seek(offset)`` if *file* has a ``seek()`` method, even if
*offset* is ``0`` (default value).

..

.. date: 2026-05-20-13-06-17
.. gh-issue: 150146
.. nonce: i5m_SL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash on a complex type variable substitution.

``from typing import TypeVar; memoryview[TypeVar("")][*typing.Mapping[...,
...]]`` used to fail due to missing ``NULL`` check on ``_unpack_args`` C
function call.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-18-36-28
.. gh-issue: 148587
.. nonce: -RD3z5
.. section: Core and Builtins

``sys.lazy_modules`` is now a set instead of a dict as initially spelled out
in PEP 810.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-16-54-54
.. gh-issue: 150042
.. nonce: LSr5W8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix refleak in queue.SimpleQueue.put if memory allocation fails.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-13-47-17
.. gh-issue: 149590
.. nonce: IPBeQx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when faulthandler is imported more than once.

..

.. date: 2026-05-16-11-03-54
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: X_gqMT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition in ``_PyBytes_FromList`` in free-threading mode.

..

.. date: 2026-05-15-11-31-57
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: ugN2rx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition in :class:`memoryview` with free-threading.

..

.. date: 2026-05-14-19-41-03
.. gh-issue: 149807
.. nonce: IwGaCo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``hash(frozendict)``: compute the hash of each ``(key, value)`` pair
correctly. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-06-54-41
.. gh-issue: 149738
.. nonce: 4BLFoH
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`sqlite3`: Disallow removing ``row_factory`` and ``text_factory``
attributes of a connection to prevent a crash on a query.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-16-47-23
.. gh-issue: 139808
.. nonce: iIs7_E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add branch protections for AArch64 (BTI/PAC) in assembly code used by
:option:`-X perf_jit <-X>` (Linux perf profiler integration).

..

.. date: 2026-05-11-14-48-56
.. gh-issue: 149676
.. nonce: 6aTrw1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``frozendict | frozendict`` hash.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-16-43-50
.. gh-issue: 148829
.. nonce: gscS14
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`sentinel` objects now support a ``repr=`` argument and their
:attr:`~sentinel.__module__` attribute is writable.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-07-42-36
.. gh-issue: 149642
.. nonce: 6ZksML
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow imports inside ``exec()`` calls within functions under
``PYTHON_LAZY_IMPORTS=all``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-09-15-22-32
.. gh-issue: 144957
.. nonce: u1F2aQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix lazy ``from`` imports of module attributes provided by module-level
``__getattr__``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-03-18-59
.. gh-issue: 149459
.. nonce: 5fhAqP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the JIT optimizer when a specialized ``LOAD_SPECIAL`` guard
deoptimized after inserting the synthetic ``NULL`` stack entry.

..

.. date: 2026-04-15-15-48-04
.. gh-issue: 148450
.. nonce: 2MEVqH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``abc.register()`` so it invalidates type version tags for registered
classes.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-17-47-30
.. gh-issue: 150685
.. nonce: EBB2mU
.. section: Library

Update bundled pip to 26.1.2

..

.. date: 2026-05-27-11-18-36
.. gh-issue: 150228
.. nonce: pNPiO-
.. section: Library

The new :class:`site.StartupState` class lets callers batch-process
:pep:`829` startup configuration files across multiple site directories
before any startup code runs, with public
:meth:`~site.StartupState.addsitedir`,
:meth:`~site.StartupState.addusersitepackages`,
:meth:`~site.StartupState.addsitepackages`, and
:meth:`~site.StartupState.process` methods.  The signature of
:func:`site.addsitedir` is unchanged from Python 3.14.  The
:data:`!defer_processing_start_files` argument and the
``process_startup_files()`` function added earlier in the 3.15 cycle have
been removed; use :class:`!site.StartupState` instead.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150406
.. nonce: jF3g63
.. section: Library

Fix a possible crash occurring during :mod:`socket` module initialization
when the system is out of memory on platforms without a reentrant
``gethostbyname``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-07-22-05
.. gh-issue: 150372
.. nonce: 9hLqhe
.. section: Library

:mod:`readline`: Fix a potential crash during tab completion caused by an
out-of-memory error during module initialization.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-20-47-45
.. gh-issue: 150157
.. nonce: ZvmO-bQZ
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in free-threaded builds that occurs when pickling by name
objects without a ``__module__`` attribute while :data:`sys.modules` is
concurrently being modified.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-11-25-58
.. gh-issue: 150175
.. nonce: 8H4Caz
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :class:`unittest.mock.ThreadingMock` where concurrent
calls could lose increments to ``call_count`` and other attributes due to a
missing lock in ``_increment_mock_call``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-19-19-00-49
.. gh-issue: 84353
.. nonce: ZU5zaQ
.. section: Library

Preserve non-UTF-8 encoded filenames when appending to a
:class:`zipfile.ZipFile`.  Previously, non-ASCII names stored in a legacy
encoding (without the UTF-8 flag bit set) could be corrupted when the
central directory was rewritten: they were decoded as cp437 and then
re-stored as UTF-8.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-17-17-20
.. gh-issue: 149189
.. nonce: a8IooK
.. section: Library

Revert the changes to :mod:`pprint` defaults. Patch by Hugo van Kemenade.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-07-44-46
.. gh-issue: 149995
.. nonce: vvtFHn
.. section: Library

Update various docstrings in :mod:`typing`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-22-37-02
.. gh-issue: 88726
.. nonce: BAoL6j
.. section: Library

The :mod:`email` package now uses standard MIME charset names "gb2312" and
"big5" instead of non-standard names "eucgb2312_cn" and "big5_tw".

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-02-25-56
.. gh-issue: 149571
.. nonce: LNyuWJ
.. section: Library

Fix the C implementation of :meth:`xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.itertext`:
it no longer emits text for comments and processing instructions.

..

.. date: 2026-05-16-21-08-33
.. gh-issue: 149921
.. nonce: I1yNML
.. section: Library

Fix reference leaks in error paths of the :mod:`!_interpchannels` and
:mod:`!_interpqueues` extension modules.

..

.. date: 2026-05-15-18-44-20
.. gh-issue: 142349
.. nonce: fHK3v1
.. section: Library

Add :keyword:`lazy` to the list of support topic by :func:`help`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-15-16-28-00
.. gh-issue: 149819
.. nonce: fixpth
.. section: Library

Fix regression in :func:`site.addsitedir` where ``.pth`` files were no
longer processed in Python subprocesses. This happened because
:func:`site.main` seeded ``known_paths`` with entries inherited from the
parent process, causing ``addsitedir`` to skip ``.pth`` processing.

..

.. date: 2026-05-14-15-55-28
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: ZaXQ0q
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in ``_random.Random.__init__`` method in free-threading
mode.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-23-18-39
.. gh-issue: 149801
.. nonce: S_FfGr
.. section: Library

Add IANA registered names and aliases with leading zeros before number (like
IBM00858, CP00858, IBM01140, CP01140) for corresponding codecs.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-13-03-45
.. gh-issue: 149718
.. nonce: SaM1NJ
.. section: Library

Coalesce consecutive identical stack frames in Tachyon, so aggregating
collectors (pstats, collapsed, flamegraph, gecko) receive one collect.
Improves sample rate 3x, error rate and missed rate drop by 70%. Patch by
Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-06-24-54
.. gh-issue: 149701
.. nonce: 8v9RTm
.. section: Library

Fix bad return code from Lib/venv/bin/activate if hashing is disabled

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-23-51-23
.. gh-issue: 149504
.. nonce: pDSCbn
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`site.addsitedir` to allow re-entrant calls from within startup
files.  Previously, a ``.pth`` file containing an ``import`` line that
called :func:`site.addsitedir` (or a ``.start`` entry point doing the same)
could crash with ``RuntimeError: dictionary changed size during iteration``
during site initialization, breaking tools such as ``uv run --with``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-19-26-50
.. gh-issue: 149584
.. nonce: x7Qm9A
.. section: Library

Fix excessive overhead in the Tachyon profiler when inspecting a remote
process by avoiding repeated remote page-cache scans, batching predicted
remote reads, and reusing cached profiler result objects. Patch by Pablo
Galindo and Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-05-10-07-21-51
.. gh-issue: 139489
.. nonce: rS7LTA
.. section: Library

Add :func:`xml.is_valid_text` to ``xml.__all__``.

..

.. date: 2026-05-09-21-02-08
.. gh-issue: 149614
.. nonce: U4snj3
.. section: Library

Fix a regression that broke the ability to deepcopy
:class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` instances.

..

.. date: 2026-05-08-15-08-35
.. gh-issue: 112821
.. nonce: t9T1YD
.. section: Library

In the REPL, autocompletion might run arbitrary code in the getter of a
descriptor. If that getter raised an exception, autocompletion would fail to
present any options for the entire object.  Autocompletion now works as
expected for these objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-08-09-11-48
.. gh-issue: 149534
.. nonce: Tw7eeY
.. section: Library

Fix merging of :class:`collections.defaultdict` and :class:`frozendict`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-21-58-17
.. gh-issue: 149388
.. nonce: DDBPeA
.. section: Library

Make :class:`!asyncio.windows_utils.PipeHandle` closing idempotent.

..

.. date: 2026-05-07-14-18-47
.. gh-issue: 149489
.. nonce: bX9iHe
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`~xml.etree.ElementTree` serialization to HTML. The content of
comments, processing instructions and elements "xmp", "iframe", "noembed",
"noframes", and "plaintext" is no longer escaped. The "plaintext" element no
longer have the closing tag. Add support of empty attributes (with value
``None``).

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-08-10-17
.. gh-issue: 149056
.. nonce: jnaD4W
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`json.load` not forwarding the *array_hook* argument to
:func:`json.loads`. Patch by Thomas Kowalski.

..

.. date: 2026-04-27-11-12-00
.. gh-issue: 149046
.. nonce: 74shDd
.. section: Library

:mod:`io`: Fix :class:`io.StringIO` serialization: no longer call
``str(obj)`` on :class:`str` subclasses. Patch by Thomas Kowalski.

..

.. date: 2026-04-23-12-50-15
.. gh-issue: 148441
.. nonce: zvpCkR
.. section: Library

:mod:`xml.parsers.expat`: prevent a crash in
:meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.CharacterDataHandler` when the character
data size exceeds the parser's :attr:`buffer size
<xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.buffer_size>`.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-09-30-00
.. gh-issue: 146452
.. nonce: Y2N6qZ8J
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in :mod:`pickle` when pickling a dictionary concurrently
mutated by another thread in the free-threaded build.

..

.. date: 2025-08-30-07-44-30
.. gh-issue: 86533
.. nonce: pathlib
.. section: Library

The :func:`os.makedirs` function and :meth:`pathlib.Path.mkdir` method now
have a *parent_mode* parameter to specify the mode for intermediate
directories when creating parent directories. This allows one to match the
behavior from Python 3.6 and earlier for :func:`os.makedirs`.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-21-08-25
.. gh-issue: 134261
.. nonce: ravGYm
.. section: Library

zip: On reproducible builds, ZipFile uses UTC instead of the local time when
writing file datetimes to avoid underflows.

..

.. date: 2025-05-19-20-29-35
.. gh-issue: 133998
.. nonce: KmElUw
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`struct.error` exception when creating a file with
:class:`gzip.GzipFile` or compressing data with :func:`gzip.compress` if the
system time is outside the range 00:00:00 UTC, January 1, 1970 through
06:28:15 UTC, February 7, 2106, or explicitly passed *mtime* argument is
outside the range ``0`` to ``2**32-1``.

..

.. date: 2025-03-01-13-36-02
.. gh-issue: 128110
.. nonce: 9wx_G0
.. section: Library

Fix bug in the parsing of :mod:`email` address headers that could result in
extraneous spaces in the decoded text when using a modern email policy.
Space between pairs of adjacent :rfc:`2047` encoded-words is now ignored,
per section 6.2 (and consistent with existing parsing of unstructured
headers like *Subject*).

..

.. date: 2024-11-02-02-02-31
.. gh-issue: 107398
.. nonce: uUtA6Q
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tarfile` stream mode exception when process the file with the gzip
extra field.

..

.. date: 2024-07-02-20-57-43
.. gh-issue: 121109
.. nonce: Tp6R2s
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`tarfile` performance issue when reading archives in streaming mode
(e.g. ``r|*``).

..

.. bpo: 45509
.. date: 2021-10-18-13-46-55
.. nonce: Upwb60
.. section: Library

Gzip headers are now checked for corrupted NAME, COMMENT and HCRC fields.

..

.. date: 2026-05-25-15-39-53
.. gh-issue: 150387
.. nonce: yzZ7jq
.. section: Tests

Fix hang in
``test.test_profiling.test_sampling_profiler.test_live_collector_ui.TestLiveModeErrors.test_run_failed_script_live``
on slow buildbots. The test now always queues a final ``q`` keystroke so the
live TUI loop exits even when the profiler collects enough samples to enter
the post-finished input loop.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-14-53-23
.. gh-issue: 149776
.. nonce: orqgsn
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket on Linux kernel 7.1 and newer: skip UDP Lite tests if it's
not supported. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-05-21-15-14-59
.. gh-issue: 148294
.. nonce: VtFaW4
.. section: Build

Corrected the use of ``AC_PATH_TOOL`` in ``configure.ac`` to allow a C++
compiler to be found on :envvar:`!PATH`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-16-00-41
.. gh-issue: 148260
.. nonce: UwFiIX
.. section: Build

On Linux when Python is linked to the musl C library, use a thread stack
size of at least 1 MiB instead of musl default which is 128 kiB. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-05-14-22-09-46
.. gh-issue: 149786
.. nonce: UI-HZM
.. section: Windows

Fixes virtual environment launchers on Windows free-threaded builds.

..

.. date: 2026-05-06-21-36-53
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: m4OBX8
.. section: Windows

Updated Windows builds to use Tcl/Tk 9.0.3.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-14-44-51
.. gh-issue: 138489
.. nonce: 234aj6
.. section: Windows

Windows distributions now include a :file:`build-details.json` file (see
:pep:`739`). The legacy installer does not install it, but all other
distributions from python.org and all preset configurations in the
``PC\layout`` script will include one.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-23-14-45
.. gh-issue: 149029
.. nonce: oPTXP4
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to ship with SQLite 3.53.1.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-10-40-00
.. gh-issue: 150644
.. nonce: zLWyjj
.. section: macOS

When system logging is enabled (with ``config.use_system_logger``, messages
are now tagged as public. This allows the macOS 26 system logger to view
messages without special configuration.

..

.. date: 2026-04-26-23-15-09
.. gh-issue: 149029
.. nonce: Lsx--T
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to ship with SQLite version 3.53.1.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-18-51-09
.. gh-issue: 150258
.. nonce: dh8GVK
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update the tooltip on the Tachyon flame graph to show both absolute and
relative percentages.

..

.. date: 2026-05-12-16-47-21
.. gh-issue: 149725
.. nonce: HZLBTZ
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`PySentinel_CheckExact` for exact :class:`sentinel` type tests
to accompany the existing :c:func:`PySentinel_Check`.

..

.. date: 2026-02-25-13-37-10
.. gh-issue: 145235
.. nonce: -1ySNR
.. section: C API

Made :c:func:`PyDict_AddWatcher`, :c:func:`PyDict_ClearWatcher`,
:c:func:`PyDict_Watch`, and :c:func:`PyDict_Unwatch` thread-safe on the
:term:`free threaded <free threading>` build.
