.. date: 2026-06-16-14-58-02
.. gh-issue: 151544
.. nonce: _bexVy
.. release date: 2026-06-23
.. section: Security

:file:`Modules/Setup.local` is no longer used as a landmark to discover
whether Python is running in a source tree, as it could potentially affect
actual installs. The :file:`pybuilddir.txt` file is now the sole indicator
of running in a source tree.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-23-38-08
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: ds-9f8
.. section: Security

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-10-23-57
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: 91GpWQ
.. section: Security

Update Android and iOS installers to use OpenSSL 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-09-36-20
.. gh-issue: 150599
.. nonce: nlHqU-
.. section: Security

Fix a possible stack buffer overflow in :mod:`bz2` when a
:class:`bz2.BZ2Decompressor` is reused after a decompression error. The
decompressor now becomes unusable after libbz2 reports an error.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-17-46-00
.. gh-issue: 149835
.. nonce: EebFlk
.. section: Security

:func:`shutil.move` now resolves symlinks via :func:`os.path.realpath` when
checking whether the destination is inside the source directory, preventing
a symlink-based bypass of that guard.

..

.. date: 2026-06-22-06-26-34
.. gh-issue: 151905
.. nonce: FOLMYg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix OOM error handling in :c:func:`PyFrame_GetBack` to propagate exceptions
instead of masking them as None.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-00-30-47
.. gh-issue: 151722
.. nonce: RPMPIY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Defer GC tracking of :class:`frozendict` to end of construction. Patch by
Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2026-06-16-17-23-37
.. gh-issue: 151546
.. nonce: LhiaZz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the stack limit check if Python is linked to musl (ex: Alpine Linux).
Use the stack size set by the linker to compute the stack limits. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-16-00-45-42
.. gh-issue: 151510
.. nonce: HJ-kGn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in :func:`!__lazy_import__` when called without an explicit
``globals`` argument and without a current Python frame.

..

.. date: 2026-06-14-05-05-15
.. gh-issue: 151461
.. nonce: 5q0s88
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix direct execution of files with invalid source encodings to report the
underlying codec lookup or decoding error instead of the generic
``SyntaxError: encoding problem`` message. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2026-06-12-15-30-25
.. gh-issue: 151218
.. nonce: 5M_nv8
.. section: Core and Builtins

:c:func:`PyConfig_Set` and :func:`sys.set_int_max_str_digits` now replace
:data:`sys.flags` (create a new object), instead of modifying
:data:`sys.flags` in-place. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-16-03-23
.. gh-issue: 151297
.. nonce: NGPkUM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an invalid pointer dereference that could occur when calling
:c:func:`PyObject_Realloc` with a NULL pointer in :term:`free-threaded
builds <free-threaded build>` or with :envvar:`PYTHONMALLOC` set to
``mimalloc``.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-15-42-46
.. gh-issue: 151253
.. nonce: 7MMQ8P
.. section: Core and Builtins

If ``import encodings`` (first import) fails at Python startup, dump the
Python path configuration to help users debugging their configuration. Patch
by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-15-19-58
.. gh-issue: 151238
.. nonce: C9Wu4x
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when compiling a concatenated f-string or t-string if an error
occurs when processing one of it's parts.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-24-35
.. gh-issue: 151112
.. nonce: 4RKCkD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the compiler that could occur when running out of memory.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-10-28-30
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: DKa6Sl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash, when there's no memory left on a device, which happened in:
code compilation, :mod:`!_interpchannels` module,
:func:`!_winapi.CreateProcess` function.

Now these places raise proper :exc:`MemoryError` errors.

..

.. date: 2026-06-08-13-14-42
.. gh-issue: 150902
.. nonce: -CWZ66
.. section: Core and Builtins

Apply an existing optimization of PyCriticalSection (single mutex) to
PyCriticalSection2: avoid acquiring the same locks that the current CS has
already acquired.

..

.. date: 2026-06-08-05-31-22
.. gh-issue: 151065
.. nonce: _o_31F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak when using the :ref:`mimalloc memory allocator <mimalloc>`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-05-22-52-41
.. gh-issue: 150988
.. nonce: fDKfMJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference leak in :exc:`OSError` when attributes are set before
``super().__init__()``.

..

.. date: 2026-06-01-19-24-12
.. gh-issue: 150723
.. nonce: WlcL_-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix perf jitdump timestamps on macOS. Events were stamped using
``CLOCK_MONOTONIC``, but macOS profilers timestamp their samples with
``mach_absolute_time()``. The mismatch prevented the JIT code mappings from
lining up with the samples, so no Python frame could be resolved.

..

.. date: 2026-06-01-19-21-01
.. gh-issue: 150723
.. nonce: Hb3JDG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix malformed perf jitdump thread ids on macOS. The ``thread_id`` field of
the ``JR_CODE_LOAD`` record was written as a 64-bit value instead of the
32-bit value required by the jitdump format, which shifted every following
field and prevented profilers from resolving Python frames.

..

.. date: 2026-06-01-19-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150700
.. nonce: W8CzVR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a :exc:`SystemError` when compiling a class-scope comprehension
containing a ``lambda`` that references ``__class__``, ``__classdict__``, or
``__conditional_annotations__``. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-20-19-35
.. gh-issue: 150633
.. nonce: XkNul0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the frozen importer accepting module names with embedded null bytes,
which caused it to bypass the :data:`sys.modules` cache and create duplicate
module objects.

..

.. date: 2026-05-24-22-46-49
.. gh-issue: 148613
.. nonce: PLpmyd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race in the free-threaded build between :func:`gc.set_threshold`
and garbage collection scheduling during object allocation.

..

.. date: 2026-05-22-21-52-38
.. gh-issue: 150207
.. nonce: l2BUtI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a memory allocation fails during tokenizer initialization.
A proper :exc:`MemoryError` is now raised instead.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-21-26-26
.. gh-issue: 149805
.. nonce: IG6cza
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a :exc:`SystemError` when compiling a compiling ``__classdict__`` class
annotation. Found by OSS-Fuzz in :oss-fuzz:`512907042`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-05-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 149321
.. nonce: remove-lazy-imports-none
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not support ``none`` as a lazy imports mode.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-15-00-00
.. gh-issue: 75666
.. nonce: Kt9xQ2
.. section: Library

Fix a reference leak in :mod:`tkinter`: the Tcl commands created for event
callbacks are now deleted when a binding is replaced or unbound.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-15-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151770
.. nonce: dtiso0
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`datetime.datetime.fromisoformat` raising :exc:`AssertionError`
instead of :exc:`ValueError` for an out-of-range month combined with a
``24:00`` time.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-14-47-55
.. gh-issue: 151665
.. nonce: 82fmzx
.. section: Library

:func:`inspect.signature` now works on the lazy evaluators of type aliases
and type parameters instead of raising :exc:`ValueError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-19-07-26-20
.. gh-issue: 151695
.. nonce: IBDlkN
.. section: Library

Fix a use-after-free in the :mod:`curses` module.  The encoding of the
initial screen, used by :func:`curses.unctrl` and :func:`curses.ungetch` to
encode non-ASCII characters, is now kept as a private copy instead of a
borrowed pointer to a window object that may be deallocated.

..

.. date: 2026-06-13-11-57-48
.. gh-issue: 151436
.. nonce: UEDowO
.. section: Library

Fix skewed stack trackes in the Tachyon profiler when caching is enabled and
when generators and coroutines are profiled, by updating
``tstate->last_profiled_frame`` at every frame-removal site. The issue
resulted in total erasure of some callers. Patch by Maurycy
Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-06-13-04-11-00
.. gh-issue: 151426
.. nonce: f2V67e
.. section: Library

Fix impossible stack traces (callers and callees cross called, orphans and
incorrect lines) in the Tachyon profiler when caching frames, by
snapshotting the stack chunks before walking the frame chain on a cache
miss. Patch by Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-06-12-22-46-31
.. gh-issue: 151403
.. nonce: DalZWh
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in :class:`subprocess.Popen` (and
``_posixsubprocess.fork_exec``) when an ``argv`` item's
:meth:`~os.PathLike.__fspath__` concurrently mutates the ``args`` sequence
being converted.

..

.. date: 2026-06-12-07-20-08
.. gh-issue: 151390
.. nonce: CmYN9EeJ
.. section: Library

Colorize ``match`` in the :term:`REPL` when followed by a unary ``+`` or
``-`` operator. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

..

.. date: 2026-06-12-00-04-34
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: aHaBYq
.. section: Library

Fix crash on unset :exc:`MemoryError` on allocation failure in
:func:`ctypes.get_errno`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-21-43-24
.. gh-issue: 151337
.. nonce: JSVV18
.. section: Library

Avoid possible memory leak in ``tkinter.c`` on Windows.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-16-25-38
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: bh_Usy
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when :exc:`MemoryError` in :func:`!os._path_splitroot` was not
set properly.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-11-52-23
.. gh-issue: 149671
.. nonce: 6Rpr5r
.. section: Library

Restore compatibility with setuptools ``-nspkg.pth`` files in the
:mod:`site` module. Inject ``sitedir`` variable in the frame which executes
pth code. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151295
.. nonce: NQYUzW
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash (use-after-free) in :meth:`bytes.join` and
:meth:`bytearray.join` that could occur if an item's
:meth:`~object.__buffer__` concurrently mutates the sequence being joined.
The mutation is now reported as a :exc:`RuntimeError` instead.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-00-00-02
.. gh-issue: 109940
.. nonce: Cx1099
.. section: Library

Fix Windows :mod:`venv` activation in ``cmd.exe`` to respect
``VIRTUAL_ENV_DISABLE_PROMPT``.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150771
.. nonce: K7mNx2
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`email` messages created with ``shift_jis`` or ``euc-jp`` charsets.
``set_content()`` now stores the payload using the output charset
(``iso-2022-jp``) so printing the message no longer raises
:exc:`UnicodeEncodeError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-07-17-29-33
.. gh-issue: 151039
.. nonce: AZ0qBn
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when static :mod:`datetime` types outlive the ``_datetime``
module.

..

.. date: 2026-06-06-15-20-54
.. gh-issue: 151021
.. nonce: J4qk2A
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`mmap.mmap.find` and :meth:`~mmap.mmap.rfind` to return ``-1``
when searching for an empty subsequence with a start position past the end
of the mapping.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-23-10-31
.. gh-issue: 62825
.. nonce: BtG_yQ
.. section: Library

Encodings "KS_C_5601-1987", "KS X 1001", etc are now aliases of "CP949"
instead of "EUC-KR".

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-21-49-18
.. gh-issue: 150913
.. nonce: EmptyBl
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`sqlite3.Blob` slice assignment to raise :exc:`TypeError` and
:exc:`IndexError` for type and size mismatches respectively, even when the
target slice is empty.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-18-22-56
.. gh-issue: 143008
.. nonce: z5tw-J
.. section: Library

Fix race conditions when re-initializing a :class:`io.TextIOWrapper` object.

..

.. date: 2026-06-03-13-51-29
.. gh-issue: 150662
.. nonce: ELT8Vg
.. section: Library

Fix the ``--gecko`` collector in :mod:`profiling.sampling` that kept every
sample in memory. It now writes sample and marker data to temporary files
and reads them back, ultimately building the output file at the end. Patch
by Pablo Galindo and Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-06-02-14-21-46
.. gh-issue: 150750
.. nonce: SVS2o0
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in :meth:`collections.deque.index` with free-threading.

..

.. date: 2026-05-27-23-47-31
.. gh-issue: 148932
.. nonce: Y1xmvA
.. section: Library

Fix ``profiling.sampling`` on Windows virtual environments to resolve the
actual Python PID from a virtual environment shim.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-22-45-54
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: T68vc_
.. section: Library

Fix race condition in :attr:`ssl.SSLContext.sni_callback`

..

.. date: 2026-05-17-12-37-59
.. gh-issue: 53144
.. nonce: c5tr1p
.. section: Library

The :mod:`email` package now supports all aliases of Python codecs and uses
MIME/IANA names for all IANA registered charsets.

..

.. date: 2026-05-15-19-52-41
.. gh-issue: 149891
.. nonce: BJUIGB
.. section: Library

Add support for more encoding aliases `officially registered in IANA
<https://www.iana.org/assignments/character-sets/character-sets.xhtml>`__.

..

.. date: 2026-05-13-12-16-54
.. gh-issue: 149473
.. nonce: nOQZqn
.. section: Library

Calling ``os.environ.clear()`` now emits ``os._clearenv`` auditing event.
Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-04-24-19-54-00
.. gh-issue: 148954
.. nonce: v1
.. section: Library

Fix XML injection vulnerability in :func:`xmlrpc.client.dumps` where the
``methodname`` was not being escaped before interpolation into the XML body.

..

.. date: 2026-01-18-06-42-47
.. gh-issue: 143988
.. nonce: MtLtCP
.. section: Library

Fixed crashes in :meth:`socket.socket.sendmsg` and
:meth:`socket.socket.recvmsg_into` that could occur if buffer sequences are
concurrently mutated.

..

.. date: 2024-06-18-04-08-37
.. gh-issue: 120665
.. nonce: x7T1hV
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue where ``unittest`` loaders would load and instantiate
:class:`unittest.TestCase`-derived subclasses that are also abstract base
classes, which can't be instantiated.

..

.. date: 2023-02-26-14-07-18
.. gh-issue: 91099
.. nonce: _QPbEL
.. section: Library

:meth:`imaplib.IMAP4.login` now raises exceptions with :class:`str` instead
of :class:`bytes`. Patch by Florian Best.

..

.. date: 2023-01-23-21-23-50
.. gh-issue: 101267
.. nonce: _f-cFH
.. section: Library

When a worker process terminates unexpectedly,
:class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` now sets a separate
:exc:`~concurrent.futures.process.BrokenProcessPool` exception on each
pending future instead of sharing a single instance among them all.  Sharing
one exception produced malformed tracebacks: each :meth:`Future.result()
<concurrent.futures.Future.result>` call re-raised the same object,
appending another copy of the traceback to it.

..

.. date: 2026-06-17-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 86726
.. nonce: __bOgH
.. section: Documentation

Greatly expand the :mod:`tkinter` documentation to cover the full public API
of the package and its submodules.  The descriptions are oriented towards
Python rather than Tcl/Tk, with corrected return types and
``versionadded``/``versionchanged`` information.

..

.. date: 2026-05-23-17-27-41
.. gh-issue: 150319
.. nonce: ol9tWK
.. section: Documentation

Generic builtin and standard library types now document the meaning of their
type parameters.

..

.. date: 2023-09-16-23-42-27
.. gh-issue: 109503
.. nonce: mZ-kdU
.. section: Documentation

Fix documentation for :func:`shutil.move` on usage of :func:`os.rename`
since nonatomic move might be used even if the files are on the same
filesystem. Patch by Fang Li

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-52-52
.. gh-issue: 151130
.. nonce: 1vslPH
.. section: Tests

Add more tests for ``PyWeakref_*`` C API.

..

.. date: 2026-06-06-16-22-00
.. gh-issue: 150966
.. nonce: 7N9x5Q
.. section: Tests

Avoid prematurely terminating failing live sampling profiler test targets,
which made stderr assertions flaky on ASAN buildbots.

..

.. date: 2026-04-24-01-38-56
.. gh-issue: 148853
.. nonce: _uM4_Q
.. section: Tests

Fix tests failing on FreeBSD in test.support's
in_systemd_nspawn_sync_suppressed()  due to unreadable /run directory.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-54-13
.. gh-issue: 151163
.. nonce: vFAtjv
.. section: Build

Updated Android build to include SQLite version 3.53.2.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-55-41
.. gh-issue: 151163
.. nonce: oizZYV
.. section: Windows

Updated Windows builds to include SQLite version 3.53.2.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-40-48
.. gh-issue: 151159
.. nonce: JKVfme
.. section: Windows

Updated bundled version of OpenSSL to 3.5.7.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-18-53-18
.. gh-issue: 150836
.. nonce: Wci7bZ
.. section: Windows

Make installed tkinter work with Tcl/Tk 9 builds that embed the Tk script
library in the Tk DLL on Windows.

..

.. date: 2026-06-09-11-52-35
.. gh-issue: 151163
.. nonce: RlPXHq
.. section: macOS

Updated macOS installer to include SQLite version 3.53.2.

..

.. bpo: 6699
.. date: 2019-12-12-03-18-02
.. nonce: 1CqJFG
.. section: IDLE

Warn the user if a file will be overwritten when saving.

..

.. date: 2026-06-18-18-24-11
.. gh-issue: 141510
.. nonce: -EOHJ1
.. section: C API

Add :class:`frozendict` to the fast paths of
:c:func:`PyMapping_GetOptionalItem`, :c:func:`PyMapping_Keys`,
:c:func:`PyMapping_Values`, and :c:func:`PyMapping_Items`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-16-43-37
.. gh-issue: 123619
.. nonce: dV82r6
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyUnstable_Object_EnableDeferredRefcount` now returns ``0`` if the
object is not tracked by the garbage collector: if :func:`gc.is_tracked` is
false. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-15-22-44
.. gh-issue: 149044
.. nonce: O7KEcs
.. section: C API

Improved error message when specifying non-type base classes in
:c:macro:`Py_tp_bases`, :c:macro:`Py_tp_base`, and *bases* argument to
:c:func:`PyType_FromMetaclass` and other ``PyType_From*`` functions.

..

.. date: 2026-06-04-14-26-17
.. gh-issue: 150907
.. nonce: CA91_B
.. section: C API

Fix ``dynamic_annotations.h`` header file when built with C++ and Valgrind:
add ``extern "C++" scope`` for the C++ template. Patch by Victor Stinner.
