.. bpo: 14699
.. date: 7633
.. nonce: AuoeMs
.. release date: 01-May-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix calling the classmethod descriptor directly.

..

.. bpo: 14433
.. date: 7632
.. nonce: HtSYT-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent msvcrt crash in interactive prompt when stdin is closed.

..

.. bpo: 14521
.. date: 7631
.. nonce: JDzRE4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make result of float('nan') and float('-nan') more consistent across
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 14646
.. date: 7630
.. nonce: 19NogB
.. section: Core and Builtins

__import__() sets __loader__ if the loader did not.

..

.. bpo: 14605
.. date: 7629
.. nonce: Psk3ZV
.. section: Core and Builtins

No longer have implicit entries in sys.meta_path. If sys.meta_path is found
to be empty, raise ImportWarning.

..

.. bpo: 14605
.. date: 7628
.. nonce: WVtAi5
.. section: Core and Builtins

No longer have implicit entries in sys.path_hooks. If sys.path_hooks is
found to be empty, a warning will be raised. None is now inserted into
sys.path_importer_cache if no finder was discovered. This also means
imp.NullImporter is no longer implicitly used.

..

.. bpo: 13903
.. date: 7627
.. nonce: 4z4rf7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 412. Individual dictionary instances can now share their keys
with other dictionaries. Classes take advantage of this to share their
instance dictionary keys for improved memory and performance.

..

.. bpo: 11603
.. date: 7626
.. nonce: aGsFsn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Setting __repr__ to __str__ now raises a RuntimeError when repr() or str()
is called on such an object.

..

.. bpo: 14658
.. date: 7625
.. nonce: jeSkqL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix binding a special method to a builtin implementation of a special method
with a different name.

..

.. bpo: 14630
.. date: 7624
.. nonce: 0bHFSA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a memory access bug for instances of a subclass of int with value 0.

..

.. bpo: 14339
.. date: 7623
.. nonce: QR-MDy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed improvements to bin, oct and hex functions.  Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14385
.. date: 7622
.. nonce: FD63CN
.. section: Core and Builtins

It is now possible to use a custom type for the __builtins__ namespace,
instead of a dict. It can be used for sandboxing for example. Raise also a
NameError instead of ImportError if __build_class__ name if not found in
__builtins__.

..

.. bpo: 12599
.. date: 7621
.. nonce: Iu99dL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Be more strict in accepting None compared to a false-like object for
importlib.util.module_for_loader and importlib.machinery.PathFinder.

..

.. bpo: 14612
.. date: 7620
.. nonce: uTBlpg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix jumping around with blocks by setting f_lineno.

..

.. bpo: 14592
.. date: 7619
.. nonce: 7PB7Zk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Attempting a relative import w/o __package__ or __name__ set in globals
raises a KeyError.

..

.. bpo: 14607
.. date: 7618
.. nonce: YEC4Eu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix keyword-only arguments which started with ``__``.

..

.. bpo: 10854
.. date: 7617
.. nonce: -vkFId
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ImportError raised when an extension module on Windows fails to import
now uses the new path and name attributes from Issue #1559549.

..

.. bpo: 13889
.. date: 7616
.. nonce: 5jUbDL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check and (if necessary) set FPU control word before calling any of the
dtoa.c string <-> float conversion functions, on MSVC builds of Python.
This fixes issues when embedding Python in a Delphi app.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7615
.. nonce: dHmS-L
.. section: Core and Builtins

__import__() now matches PEP 328 and documentation by defaulting 'index' to
0 instead of -1 and removing support for negative values.

..

.. bpo: 2377
.. date: 7614
.. nonce: 0jsA57
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make importlib the implementation of __import__().

..

.. bpo: 1559549
.. date: 7613
.. nonce: krys02
.. section: Core and Builtins

ImportError now has 'name' and 'path' attributes that are set using keyword
arguments to its constructor. They are currently not set by import as they
are meant for use by importlib.

..

.. bpo: 14474
.. date: 7612
.. nonce: duWZWs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Save and restore exception state in thread.start_new_thread() while writing
error message if the thread leaves a unhandled exception.

..

.. bpo: 13019
.. date: 7611
.. nonce: LYHgJO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential reference leaks in bytearray.extend().  Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 14768
.. date: 7610
.. nonce: NGBeVQ
.. section: Library

os.path.expanduser('~/a') doesn't works correctly when HOME is '/'.

..

.. bpo: 14371
.. date: 7609
.. nonce: w4YKgU
.. section: Library

Support bzip2 in zipfile module.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 13183
.. date: 7608
.. nonce: WXohoU
.. section: Library

Fix pdb skipping frames after hitting a breakpoint and running step.  Patch
by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 14696
.. date: 7607
.. nonce: 6sKxyV
.. section: Library

Fix parser module to understand 'nonlocal' declarations.

..

.. bpo: 10941
.. date: 7606
.. nonce: T2_m5t
.. section: Library

Fix imaplib.Internaldate2tuple to produce correct result near the DST
transition.  Patch by Joe Peterson.

..

.. bpo: 9154
.. date: 7605
.. nonce: l5Z37S
.. section: Library

Fix parser module to understand function annotations.

..

.. bpo: 6085
.. date: 7604
.. nonce: K59hDR
.. section: Library

In http.server.py SimpleHTTPServer.address_string returns the client ip
address instead client hostname. Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 14309
.. date: 7603
.. nonce: 0TEhbF
.. section: Library

Deprecate time.clock(), use time.perf_counter() or time.process_time()
instead.

..

.. bpo: 14428
.. date: 7602
.. nonce: HY9aE6
.. section: Library

Implement the PEP 418. Add time.get_clock_info(), time.perf_counter() and
time.process_time() functions, and rename time.steady() to time.monotonic().

..

.. bpo: 14646
.. date: 7601
.. nonce: kSPenl
.. section: Library

importlib.util.module_for_loader() now sets __loader__ and __package__ (when
possible).

..

.. bpo: 14664
.. date: 7600
.. nonce: pdyfQE
.. section: Library

It is now possible to use @unittest.skip{If,Unless} on a test class that
doesn't inherit from TestCase (i.e. a mixin).

..

.. bpo: 4892
.. date: 7599
.. nonce: XAcc2_
.. section: Library

multiprocessing Connections can now be transferred over multiprocessing
Connections.  Patch by Richard Oudkerk (sbt).

..

.. bpo: 14160
.. date: 7598
.. nonce: eP9a5e
.. section: Library

TarFile.extractfile() failed to resolve symbolic links when the links were
not located in an archive subdirectory.

..

.. bpo: 14638
.. date: 7597
.. nonce: cfMimX
.. section: Library

pydoc now treats non-string __name__ values as if they were missing, instead
of raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 13684
.. date: 7596
.. nonce: GMakQh
.. section: Library

Fix httplib tunnel issue of infinite loops for certain sites which send EOF
without trailing \r\n.

..

.. bpo: 14605
.. date: 7595
.. nonce: 0oYc81
.. section: Library

Add importlib.abc.FileLoader, importlib.machinery.(FileFinder,
SourceFileLoader, SourcelessFileLoader, ExtensionFileLoader).

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7594
.. nonce: q2O_A_
.. section: Library

imp.cache_from_source()/source_from_cache() now follow
os.path.join()/split() semantics for path manipulation instead of its prior,
custom semantics of caring the right-most path separator forward in path
joining.

..

.. bpo: 2193
.. date: 7593
.. nonce: EwmaL0
.. section: Library

Allow ":" character in Cookie NAME values.

..

.. bpo: 14629
.. date: 7592
.. nonce: CT9YOf
.. section: Library

tokenizer.detect_encoding will specify the filename in the SyntaxError
exception if found at readline.__self__.name.

..

.. bpo: 14629
.. date: 7591
.. nonce: NmM4VS
.. section: Library

Raise SyntaxError in tokenizer.detect_encoding if the first two lines have
non-UTF-8 characters without an encoding declaration.

..

.. bpo: 14308
.. date: 7590
.. nonce: VI_YtW
.. section: Library

Fix an exception when a "dummy" thread is in the threading module's active
list after a fork().

..

.. bpo: 11750
.. date: 7589
.. nonce: zqcMd9
.. section: Library

The Windows API functions scattered in the _subprocess and
_multiprocessing.win32 modules now live in a single module "_winapi". Patch
by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 14087
.. date: 7588
.. nonce: jLqw-6
.. section: Library

multiprocessing: add Condition.wait_for(). Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 14538
.. date: 7587
.. nonce: l61eIV
.. section: Library

HTMLParser can now parse correctly start tags that contain a bare '/'.

..

.. bpo: 14452
.. date: 7586
.. nonce: TPNgz8
.. section: Library

SysLogHandler no longer inserts a UTF-8 BOM into the message.

..

.. bpo: 14386
.. date: 7585
.. nonce: 98-5AW
.. section: Library

Expose the dict_proxy internal type as types.MappingProxyType.

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7584
.. nonce: lhqW73
.. section: Library

Make imp.reload() always use a module's __loader__ to perform the reload.

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7583
.. nonce: -UuY7L
.. section: Library

Add imp.py and rename the built-in module to _imp, allowing for re-
implementing parts of the module in pure Python.

..

.. bpo: 13496
.. date: 7582
.. nonce: ZTq6yk
.. section: Library

Fix potential overflow in bisect.bisect algorithm when applied to a
collection of size > sys.maxsize / 2.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7581
.. nonce: bW_hJ4
.. section: Library

Have importlib take advantage of ImportError's new 'name' and 'path'
attributes.

..

.. bpo: 14399
.. date: 7580
.. nonce: aGumG7
.. section: Library

zipfile now recognizes that the archive has been modified even if only the
comment is changed.  In addition, the TypeError that results from trying to
set a non-binary value as a comment is now raised at the time the comment is
set rather than at the time the zipfile is written.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7579
.. nonce: hVFHSa
.. section: Library

trace.CoverageResults.is_ignored_filename() now ignores any name that starts
with "<" and ends with ">" instead of special-casing "<string>" and
"<doctest ".

..

.. bpo: 12537
.. date: 7578
.. nonce: IJxACy
.. section: Library

The mailbox module no longer depends on knowledge of internal implementation
details of the email package Message object.

..

.. bpo: 7978
.. date: 7577
.. nonce: ULB0fY
.. section: Library

socketserver now restarts the select() call when EINTR is returned.  This
avoids crashing the server loop when a signal is received. Patch by Jerzy
Kozera.

..

.. bpo: 14522
.. date: 7576
.. nonce: ZFkCm3
.. section: Library

Avoid duplicating socket handles in multiprocessing.connection. Patch by
sbt.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7575
.. nonce: jSwSmB
.. section: Library

Don't Py_DECREF NULL variable in io.IncrementalNewlineDecoder.

..

.. bpo: 3033
.. date: 7574
.. nonce: 4pfXoI
.. section: Library

Add displayof parameter to tkinter font. Patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 14482
.. date: 7573
.. nonce: vPb000
.. section: Library

Raise a ValueError, not a NameError, when trying to create a multiprocessing
Client or Listener with an AF_UNIX type address under Windows.  Patch by
Popa Claudiu.

..

.. bpo: 802310
.. date: 7572
.. nonce: ko_Bca
.. section: Library

Generate always unique tkinter font names if not directly passed.

..

.. bpo: 14151
.. date: 7571
.. nonce: cy_gqr
.. section: Library

Raise a ValueError, not a NameError, when trying to create a multiprocessing
Client or Listener with an AF_PIPE type address under non-Windows platforms.
Patch by Popa Claudiu.

..

.. bpo: 14493
.. date: 7570
.. nonce: ubcGd5
.. section: Library

Use gvfs-open or xdg-open in webbrowser.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7569
.. nonce: E9EckD
.. section: Build

"make touch" will now touch generated files that are checked into Mercurial,
after a "hg update" which failed to bring the timestamps into the right
order.

..

.. bpo: 14026
.. date: 7568
.. nonce: M8IplH
.. section: Tests

In test_cmd_line_script, check that sys.argv is populated correctly for the
various invocation approaches (Patch by Jason Yeo)

..

.. bpo: 14032
.. date: 7567
.. nonce: GigeG2
.. section: Tests

Fix incorrect variable name in test_cmd_line_script debugging message (Patch
by Jason Yeo)

..

.. bpo: 14589
.. date: 7566
.. nonce: 9aNtuR
.. section: Tests

Update certificate chain for sha256.tbs-internet.com, fixing a test failure
in test_ssl.

..

.. bpo: 14355
.. date: 7565
.. nonce: A4THFc
.. section: Tests

Regrtest now supports the standard unittest test loading, and will use it if
a test file contains no `test_main` method.

..

.. bpo: 8515
.. date: 7564
.. nonce: wY13t0
.. section: IDLE

Set __file__ when run file in IDLE. Initial patch by Bruce Frederiksen.

..

.. bpo: 14496
.. date: 7563
.. nonce: qkJxeK
.. section: IDLE

Fix wrong name in idlelib/tabbedpages.py. Patch by Popa Claudiu.

..

.. bpo: 3561
.. date: 7562
.. nonce: ka-akT
.. section: Tools/Demos

The Windows installer now has an option, off by default, for placing the
Python installation into the system "Path" environment variable.

..

.. bpo: 13165
.. date: 7561
.. nonce: j-kIjl
.. section: Tools/Demos

stringbench is now available in the Tools/stringbench folder. It used to
live in its own SVN project.

..

.. bpo: 14098
.. date: 7560
.. nonce: hNJoW-
.. section: C API

New functions PyErr_GetExcInfo and PyErr_SetExcInfo. Patch by Stefan Behnel.
