.. bpo: 15900
.. date: 7989
.. nonce: yot4lz
.. release date: 23-Sep-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leak in `PyUnicode_TranslateCharmap()`.

..

.. bpo: 15926
.. date: 7988
.. nonce: g2IIQa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash after multiple reinitializations of the interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 15895
.. date: 7987
.. nonce: KirUDy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix FILE pointer leak in one error branch of `PyRun_SimpleFileExFlags()`
when filename points to a pyc/pyo file, closeit is false an and
set_main_loader() fails.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7986
.. nonce: MMXe9c
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes for a few crash and memory leak regressions found by Coverity.

..

.. bpo: 15882
.. date: 7985
.. nonce: tDRdOi
.. section: Library

Change `_decimal` to accept any coefficient tuple when constructing
infinities. This is done for backwards compatibility with decimal.py:
Infinity coefficients are undefined in _decimal (in accordance with the
specification).

..

.. bpo: 15925
.. date: 7984
.. nonce: ar8SuV
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in `email.util` where the `parsedate()` and
`parsedate_tz()` functions did not return None anymore when the argument
could not be parsed.

..

.. bpo: 15973
.. date: 7983
.. nonce: y4zCIp
.. section: Library

Fix a segmentation fault when comparing datetime timezone objects.

..

.. bpo: 15977
.. date: 7982
.. nonce: TElugq
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in Modules/_ssl.c when the function _set_npn_protocols() is
called multiple times, thanks to Daniel Sommermann.

..

.. bpo: 15969
.. date: 7981
.. nonce: dX5BRm
.. section: Library

`faulthandler` module: rename dump_tracebacks_later() to
dump_traceback_later() and cancel_dump_tracebacks_later() to
cancel_dump_traceback_later().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7980
.. nonce: ZqEirp
.. section: Library

_decimal module: use only C 89 style comments.
