.. bpo: 20731
.. date: 9943
.. nonce: _03SZg
.. release date: 02-Mar-2014
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly position in source code files even if they are opened in text mode.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 19619
.. date: 9942
.. nonce: p4mly-
.. section: Core and Builtins

str.encode, bytes.decode and bytearray.decode now use an internal API to
throw LookupError for known non-text encodings, rather than attempting the
encoding or decoding operation and then throwing a TypeError for an
unexpected output type. (The latter mechanism remains in place for third
party non-text encodings)

..

.. bpo: 20778
.. date: 9941
.. nonce: g_fAGI
.. section: Library

Fix modulefinder to work with bytecode-only modules.

..

.. bpo: 20791
.. date: 9940
.. nonce: n_zrkc
.. section: Library

copy.copy() now doesn't make a copy when the input is a bytes object.
Initial patch by Peter Otten.

..

.. bpo: 20621
.. date: 9939
.. nonce: E_LQ4E
.. section: Library

Fixes a zipimport bug introduced in 3.3.4 that could cause spurious crashes
or SystemErrors when importing modules or packages from a zip file.  The
change causing the problem was reverted.

..

.. bpo: 20404
.. date: 9938
.. nonce: 9dU6on
.. section: Library

io.TextIOWrapper (and hence the open() builtin) now uses the internal codec
marking system added for issue #19619 to throw LookupError for known non-
text encodings at stream construction time. The existing output type checks
remain in place to deal with unmarked third party codecs.

..

.. bpo: 20743
.. date: 9937
.. nonce: hxZQUf
.. section: Tests

Fix a reference leak in test_tcl.

..

.. bpo: 20535
.. date: 9936
.. nonce: 0qkvZZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

PYTHONWARNING no longer affects the run_tests.py script. Patch by Arfrever
Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.
