.. bpo: 1683368
.. date: 7559
.. nonce: 6VUt7_
.. release date: 01-Apr-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

object.__new__ and object.__init__ raise a TypeError if they are passed
arguments and their complementary method is not overridden.

..

.. bpo: 14378
.. date: 7558
.. nonce: SYESoz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix compiling ast.ImportFrom nodes with a "__future__" string as the module
name that was not interned.

..

.. bpo: 14331
.. date: 7557
.. nonce: xcTH6m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use significantly less stack space when importing modules by allocating path
buffers on the heap instead of the stack.

..

.. bpo: 14334
.. date: 7556
.. nonce: jfh6Id
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent in a segfault in type.__getattribute__ when it was not passed
strings.

..

.. bpo: 1469629
.. date: 7555
.. nonce: ej86Z-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow cycles through an object's __dict__ slot to be collected. (For example
if ``x.__dict__ is x``).

..

.. bpo: 14205
.. date: 7554
.. nonce: oOwD6n
.. section: Core and Builtins

dict lookup raises a RuntimeError if the dict is modified during a lookup.

..

.. bpo: 14220
.. date: 7553
.. nonce: jQUaQe
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a generator is delegating to another iterator with the yield from
syntax, it needs to have its ``gi_running`` flag set to True.

..

.. bpo: 14435
.. date: 7552
.. nonce: fqTeXP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove dedicated block allocator from floatobject.c and rely on the
PyObject_Malloc() api like all other objects.

..

.. bpo: 14471
.. date: 7551
.. nonce: NQQ20o
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible buffer overrun in the winreg module.

..

.. bpo: 14288
.. date: 7550
.. nonce: zU3alc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow the serialization of builtin iterators

..

.. bpo: 14300
.. date: 7549
.. nonce: EKXEH3
.. section: Library

Under Windows, sockets created using socket.dup() now allow overlapped I/O.
Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 13872
.. date: 7548
.. nonce: xHvdXX
.. section: Library

socket.detach() now marks the socket closed (as mirrored in the socket
repr()).  Patch by Matt Joiner.

..

.. bpo: 14406
.. date: 7547
.. nonce: zdFILX
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition when using ``concurrent.futures.wait(
return_when=ALL_COMPLETED)``.  Patch by Matt Joiner.

..

.. bpo: 5136
.. date: 7546
.. nonce: 7H2rv2
.. section: Library

deprecate old, unused functions from tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 14416
.. date: 7545
.. nonce: UuoZhW
.. section: Library

syslog now defines the LOG_ODELAY and LOG_AUTHPRIV constants if they are
defined in <syslog.h>.

..

.. bpo: 14295
.. date: 7544
.. nonce: -_TkX_
.. section: Library

Add unittest.mock

..

.. bpo: 7652
.. date: 7543
.. nonce: iEr-y0
.. section: Library

Add --with-system-libmpdec option to configure for linking the _decimal
module against an installed libmpdec.

..

.. bpo: 14380
.. date: 7542
.. nonce: vbD08Y
.. section: Library

MIMEText now defaults to utf-8 when passed non-ASCII unicode with no charset
specified.

..

.. bpo: 10340
.. date: 7541
.. nonce: QZDDK-
.. section: Library

asyncore - properly handle EINVAL in dispatcher constructor on OSX; avoid to
call handle_connect in case of a disconnected socket which was not meant to
connect.

..

.. bpo: 14204
.. date: 7540
.. nonce: rzzuGo
.. section: Library

The ssl module now has support for the Next Protocol Negotiation extension,
if available in the underlying OpenSSL library. Patch by Colin Marc.

..

.. bpo: 3035
.. date: 7539
.. nonce: 8RlPJT
.. section: Library

Unused functions from tkinter are marked as pending deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 12757
.. date: 7538
.. nonce: lfCCKo
.. section: Library

Fix the skipping of doctests when python is run with -OO so that it works in
unittest's verbose mode as well as non-verbose mode.

..

.. bpo: 7652
.. date: 7537
.. nonce: 78v0L0
.. section: Library

Integrate the decimal floating point libmpdec library to speed up the
decimal module. Performance gains of the new C implementation are between
10x and 100x, depending on the application.

..

.. bpo: 14269
.. date: 7536
.. nonce: xxkPQ3
.. section: Library

SMTPD now conforms to the RFC and requires a HELO command before MAIL, RCPT,
or DATA.

..

.. bpo: 13694
.. date: 7535
.. nonce: qresWC
.. section: Library

asynchronous connect in asyncore.dispatcher does not set addr attribute.

..

.. bpo: 14344
.. date: 7534
.. nonce: 10T1SA
.. section: Library

fixed the repr of email.policy objects.

..

.. bpo: 11686
.. date: 7533
.. nonce: KKCNSn
.. section: Library

Added missing entries to email package __all__ lists (mostly the new Bytes
classes).

..

.. bpo: 14335
.. date: 7532
.. nonce: V2jcRC
.. section: Library

multiprocessing's custom Pickler subclass now inherits from the
C-accelerated implementation.  Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 10484
.. date: 7531
.. nonce: NgDSdJ
.. section: Library

Fix the CGIHTTPServer's PATH_INFO handling problem.

..

.. bpo: 11199
.. date: 7530
.. nonce: UMivCa
.. section: Library

Fix the with urllib which hangs on particular ftp urls.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7529
.. nonce: Z_Hbwr
.. section: Library

Improve the memory utilization and speed of functools.lru_cache.

..

.. bpo: 14222
.. date: 7528
.. nonce: ERgGnw
.. section: Library

Use the new time.steady() function instead of time.time() for timeout in
queue and threading modules to not be affected of system time update.

..

.. bpo: 13248
.. date: 7527
.. nonce: QDAkYv
.. section: Library

Remove lib2to3.pytree.Base.get_prefix/set_prefix.

..

.. bpo: 14234
.. date: 7526
.. nonce: 3-5k8_
.. section: Library

CVE-2012-0876: Randomize hashes of xml attributes in the hash table internal
to the pyexpat module's copy of the expat library to avoid a denial of
service due to hash collisions.  Patch by David Malcolm with some
modifications by the expat project.

..

.. bpo: 12818
.. date: 7525
.. nonce: phT2cB
.. section: Library

format address no longer needlessly \ escapes ()s in names when the name
ends up being quoted.

..

.. bpo: 14062
.. date: 7524
.. nonce: da3P2T
.. section: Library

BytesGenerator now correctly folds Header objects, including using linesep
when folding.

..

.. bpo: 13839
.. date: 7523
.. nonce: 2p10As
.. section: Library

When invoked on the command-line, the pstats module now accepts several
filenames of profile stat files and merges them all. Patch by Matt Joiner.

..

.. bpo: 14291
.. date: 7522
.. nonce: RC5jhD
.. section: Library

Email now defaults to utf-8 for non-ASCII unicode headers instead of raising
an error.  This fixes a regression relative to 2.7.

..

.. bpo: 989712
.. date: 7521
.. nonce: DK9VYH
.. section: Library

Support using Tk without a mainloop.

..

.. bpo: 3835
.. date: 7520
.. nonce: 2J2TSu
.. section: Library

Refuse to use unthreaded Tcl in threaded Python.

..

.. bpo: 2843
.. date: 7519
.. nonce: R6eFw1
.. section: Library

Add new Tk API to Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 14184
.. date: 7518
.. nonce: 6AXV0T
.. section: Library

Increase the default stack size for secondary threads on Mac OS X to avoid
interpreter crashes when using threads on 10.7.

..

.. bpo: 14180
.. date: 7517
.. nonce: 6RcdYN
.. section: Library

datetime.date.fromtimestamp(), datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp() and
datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp() now raise an OSError instead of
ValueError if localtime() or gmtime() failed.

..

.. bpo: 14180
.. date: 7516
.. nonce: qe2Eei
.. section: Library

time.ctime(), gmtime(), time.localtime(), datetime.date.fromtimestamp(),
datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp() and datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp()
now raises an OverflowError, instead of a ValueError, if the timestamp does
not fit in time_t.

..

.. bpo: 14180
.. date: 7515
.. nonce: XzoCLE
.. section: Library

datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp() and datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp()
now round microseconds towards zero instead of rounding to nearest with ties
going away from zero.

..

.. bpo: 10543
.. date: 7514
.. nonce: hhj5c8
.. section: Library

Fix unittest test discovery with Jython bytecode files.

..

.. bpo: 1178863
.. date: 7513
.. nonce: qZwz1u
.. section: Library

Separate initialisation from setting when initializing Tkinter.Variables;
harmonize exceptions to ValueError; only delete variables that have not been
deleted; assert that variable names are strings.

..

.. bpo: 14104
.. date: 7512
.. nonce: OxYNl1
.. section: Library

Implement time.monotonic() on Mac OS X, patch written by Nicholas Riley.

..

.. bpo: 13394
.. date: 7511
.. nonce: 5-MRTZ
.. section: Library

the aifc module now uses warnings.warn() to signal warnings.

..

.. bpo: 14252
.. date: 7510
.. nonce: -5zjL9
.. section: Library

Fix subprocess.Popen.terminate() to not raise an error under Windows when
the child process has already exited.

..

.. bpo: 14223
.. date: 7509
.. nonce: J3xsO9
.. section: Library

curses.addch() is no more limited to the range 0-255 when the Python curses
is not linked to libncursesw. It was a regression introduced in Python
3.3a1.

..

.. bpo: 14168
.. date: 7508
.. nonce: k48rkQ
.. section: Library

Check for presence of Element._attrs in minidom before accessing it.

..

.. bpo: 12328
.. date: 7507
.. nonce: 0ou86A
.. section: Library

Fix multiprocessing's use of overlapped I/O on Windows. Also, add a
multiprocessing.connection.wait(rlist, timeout=None) function for polling
multiple objects at once.  Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 14007
.. date: 7506
.. nonce: QgHRiZ
.. section: Library

Accept incomplete TreeBuilder objects (missing start, end, data or close
method) for the Python implementation as well. Drop the no-op
TreeBuilder().xml() method from the C implementation.

..

.. bpo: 14210
.. date: 7505
.. nonce: PDzvZF
.. section: Library

pdb now has tab-completion not only for command names, but also for their
arguments, wherever possible.

..

.. bpo: 14310
.. date: 7504
.. nonce: mho0IY
.. section: Library

Sockets can now be with other processes on Windows using the api
socket.socket.share() and socket.fromshare().

..

.. bpo: 10576
.. date: 7503
.. nonce: hVfEHY
.. section: Library

The gc module now has a 'callbacks' member that will get called when garbage
collection takes place.

..

.. bpo: 14557
.. date: 7502
.. nonce: UCbIq7
.. section: Build

Fix extensions build on HP-UX. Patch by Adi Roiban.

..

.. bpo: 14387
.. date: 7501
.. nonce: akFGpn
.. section: Build

Do not include accu.h from Python.h.

..

.. bpo: 14359
.. date: 7500
.. nonce: d8AJnN
.. section: Build

Only use O_CLOEXEC in _posixmodule.c if it is defined. Based on patch from
Hervé Coatanhay.

..

.. bpo: 14321
.. date: 7499
.. nonce: 3fOzVM
.. section: Build

Do not run pgen during the build if files are up to date.

..

.. bpo: 14034
.. date: 7498
.. nonce: 34GDTv
.. section: Documentation

added the argparse tutorial.

..

.. bpo: 14324
.. date: 7497
.. nonce: njGV1Q
.. section: Documentation

Fix configure tests for cross builds.

..

.. bpo: 14327
.. date: 7496
.. nonce: F1iSk5
.. section: Documentation

Call AC_CANONICAL_HOST in configure.ac and check in config.{guess,sub}.
Don't use uname calls for cross builds.

..

.. bpo: 9041
.. date: 7495
.. nonce: iLXuHK
.. section: Library

An issue in ctypes.c_longdouble, ctypes.c_double, and ctypes.c_float that
caused an incorrect exception to be returned in the case of overflow has
been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 14212
.. date: 7494
.. nonce: 78Bmn2
.. section: Library

The re module didn't retain a reference to buffers it was scanning,
resulting in segfaults.

..

.. bpo: 14259
.. date: 7493
.. nonce: EG-kwB
.. section: Library

The finditer() method of re objects did not take any keyword arguments,
contrary to the documentation.

..

.. bpo: 10142
.. date: 7492
.. nonce: iHMgqe
.. section: Library

Support for SEEK_HOLE/SEEK_DATA (for example, under ZFS).

..

.. bpo: 14442
.. date: 7491
.. nonce: 9ett0-
.. section: Tests

Add missing errno import in test_smtplib.

..

.. bpo: 8315
.. date: 7490
.. nonce: 2qXCkM
.. section: Tests

(partial fix) python -m unittest test.test_email now works.
