.. bpo: 15573
.. date: 7967
.. nonce: 6-QAPO
.. release date: 25-Aug-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview comparisons are now performed by value with full support for any
valid struct module format definition.

..

.. bpo: 15316
.. date: 7966
.. nonce: kFKLpQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

When an item in the fromlist for `__import__()` doesn't exist, don't raise
an error, but if an exception is raised as part of an import do let that
propagate.

..

.. bpo: 15778
.. date: 7965
.. nonce: URaMpQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that ``str(ImportError(msg))`` returns a str even when msg isn't a
str.

..

.. bpo: 2051
.. date: 7964
.. nonce: ATEUvX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Source file permission bits are once again correctly copied to the cached
bytecode file. (The migration to importlib reintroduced this problem because
these was no regression test. A test has been added as part of this patch)

..

.. bpo: 15761
.. date: 7963
.. nonce: PLrF5o
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when ``PYTHONEXECUTABLE`` is set on Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 15726
.. date: 7962
.. nonce: PC56aB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect bounds checking in PyState_FindModule.  Patch by Robin
Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 15604
.. date: 7961
.. nonce: SJAkFr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update uses of `PyObject_IsTrue()` to check for and handle errors correctly.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14846
.. date: 7960
.. nonce: jI2Zl_
.. section: Core and Builtins

`importlib.FileFinder` now handles the case where the directory being
searched is removed after a previous import attempt.

..

.. bpo: 13370
.. date: 7959
.. nonce: KobXSZ
.. section: Library

Ensure that ctypes works on Mac OS X when Python is compiled using the clang
compiler.

..

.. bpo: 13072
.. date: 7958
.. nonce: HlsZI-
.. section: Library

The array module's 'u' format code is now deprecated and will be removed in
Python 4.0.

..

.. bpo: 15544
.. date: 7957
.. nonce: 3QjWdU
.. section: Library

Fix Decimal.__float__ to work with payload-carrying NaNs.

..

.. bpo: 15776
.. date: 7956
.. nonce: --Euj0
.. section: Library

Allow pyvenv to work in existing directory with --clean.

..

.. bpo: 15249
.. date: 7955
.. nonce: ho-Io6
.. section: Library

email's BytesGenerator now correctly mangles From lines (when requested)
even if the body contains undecodable bytes.

..

.. bpo: 15777
.. date: 7954
.. nonce: AVmvaJ
.. section: Library

Fix a refleak in _posixsubprocess.

..

.. bpo: 665194
.. date: 7953
.. nonce: AECTWV
.. section: Library

Update `email.utils.localtime` to use datetime.astimezone and correctly
handle historic changes in UTC offsets.

..

.. bpo: 15199
.. date: 7952
.. nonce: iOOV1X
.. section: Library

Fix JavaScript's default MIME type to application/javascript. Patch by
Bohuslav Kabrda.

..

.. bpo: 12643
.. date: 7951
.. nonce: Jy2fyw
.. section: Library

`code.InteractiveConsole` now respects `sys.excepthook` when displaying
exceptions.  Patch by Aaron Iles.

..

.. bpo: 13579
.. date: 7950
.. nonce: SqZ8Sq
.. section: Library

`string.Formatter` now understands the 'a' conversion specifier.

..

.. bpo: 15595
.. date: 7949
.. nonce: dk1eKQ
.. section: Library

Fix ``subprocess.Popen(universal_newlines=True)`` for certain locales
(utf-16 and utf-32 family). Patch by Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 15477
.. date: 7948
.. nonce: 9gGqPw
.. section: Library

In cmath and math modules, add workaround for platforms whose system-
supplied log1p function doesn't respect signs of zeros.

..

.. bpo: 15715
.. date: 7947
.. nonce: 3g_xGx
.. section: Library

`importlib.__import__()` will silence an ImportError when the use of
fromlist leads to a failed import.

..

.. bpo: 14669
.. date: 7946
.. nonce: mVYj1T
.. section: Library

Fix pickling of connections and sockets on Mac OS X by sending/receiving an
acknowledgment after file descriptor transfer. TestPicklingConnection has
been reenabled for Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 11062
.. date: 7945
.. nonce: ZhTF21
.. section: Library

Fix adding a message from file to Babyl mailbox.

..

.. bpo: 15646
.. date: 7944
.. nonce: bzzL5z
.. section: Library

Prevent equivalent of a fork bomb when using `multiprocessing` on Windows
without the ``if __name__ == '__main__'`` idiom.

..

.. bpo: 15678
.. date: 7943
.. nonce: Uq5eEl
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE menus when started from OS X command line (3.3.0b2 regression).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7942
.. nonce: 2necKS
.. section: Documentation

Touched up the Python 2 to 3 porting guide.

..

.. bpo: 14674
.. date: 7941
.. nonce: VC9ve3
.. section: Documentation

Add a discussion of the `json` module's standard compliance. Patch by Chris
Rebert.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7940
.. nonce: BGYuhC
.. section: Documentation

Create a 'Concurrent Execution' section in the docs, and split up the
'Optional Operating System Services' section to use a more user-centric
classification scheme (splitting them across the new CE section, IPC and
text processing). Operating system limitations can be reflected with the
Sphinx ``:platform:`` tag, it doesn't make sense as part of the Table of
Contents.

..

.. bpo: 4966
.. date: 7939
.. nonce: -5pabe
.. section: Documentation

Bring the sequence docs up to date for the Py3k transition and the many
language enhancements since they were original written.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7938
.. nonce: jD4Bea
.. section: Documentation

The "path importer" misnomer has been replaced with Eric Snow's more-
awkward-but-at-least-not-wrong suggestion of "path based finder" in the
import system reference docs.

..

.. bpo: 15640
.. date: 7937
.. nonce: qijhlP
.. section: Documentation

Document `importlib.abc.Finder` as deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 15630
.. date: 7936
.. nonce: 1E1IGr
.. section: Documentation

Add an example for "continue" stmt in the tutorial.  Patch by Daniel Ellis.

..

.. bpo: 15747
.. date: 7935
.. nonce: An6Xbj
.. section: Tests

ZFS always returns EOPNOTSUPP when attempting to set the UF_IMMUTABLE flag
(via either chflags or lchflags); refactor affected tests in test_posix.py
to account for this.

..

.. bpo: 15285
.. date: 7934
.. nonce: rJh9vn
.. section: Tests

Refactor the approach for testing connect timeouts using two external hosts
that have been configured specifically for this type of test.

..

.. bpo: 15743
.. date: 7933
.. nonce: k_VrGz
.. section: Tests

Remove the deprecated method usage in `urllib` tests. Patch by Jeff Knupp.

..

.. bpo: 15615
.. date: 7932
.. nonce: pjU4Wf
.. section: Tests

Add some tests for the `json` module's handling of invalid input data.
Patch by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7931
.. nonce: SVSrkA
.. section: Build

Output lib files for PGO build into PGO directory.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7930
.. nonce: KlXR19
.. section: Build

Pick up 32-bit launcher from PGO directory on 64-bit PGO build.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7929
.. nonce: rErpCh
.. section: Build

Drop ``PC\python_nt.h`` as it's not used.  Add input dependency on custom
build step.

..

.. bpo: 15511
.. date: 7928
.. nonce: Fli23V
.. section: Build

Drop explicit dependency on pythonxy.lib from _decimal amd64 configuration.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7927
.. nonce: UI3Nwa
.. section: Build

Add missing PGI/PGO configurations for pywlauncher.

..

.. bpo: 15645
.. date: 7926
.. nonce: aLjenQ
.. section: Build

Ensure 2to3 grammar pickles are properly installed.
