.. bpo: 14835
.. date: 7715
.. nonce: XM_5ed
.. release date: 31-May-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make plistlib output empty arrays & dicts like OS X. Patch by Sidney San
Martín.

..

.. bpo: 14744
.. date: 7714
.. nonce: FseMcV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use the new _PyUnicodeWriter internal API to speed up str%args and
str.format(args).

..

.. bpo: 14930
.. date: 7713
.. nonce: Ikvjrf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make memoryview objects weakrefable.

..

.. bpo: 14775
.. date: 7712
.. nonce: AHE3Lc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential quadratic dict build-up due to the garbage collector
repeatedly trying to untrack dicts.

..

.. bpo: 14857
.. date: 7711
.. nonce: rTFQgb
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix regression in references to PEP 3135 implicit __class__ closure variable
(Reopens issue #12370)

..

.. bpo: 14712
.. date: 7710
.. nonce: mRmfwj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Virtual environments. Implemented by Vinay Sajip. (See also: PEP 405)

..

.. bpo: 14660
.. date: 7709
.. nonce: PEfehh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Namespace packages. Implemented by Eric Smith. (See also: PEP 420)

..

.. bpo: 14494
.. date: 7708
.. nonce: OjJqfu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix __future__.py and its documentation to note that absolute imports are
the default behavior in 3.0 instead of 2.7. Patch by Sven Marnach.

..

.. bpo: 9260
.. date: 7707
.. nonce: M5Uhkv
.. section: Core and Builtins

A finer-grained import lock.  Most of the import sequence now uses per-
module locks rather than the global import lock, eliminating well-known
issues with threads and imports.

..

.. bpo: 14624
.. date: 7706
.. nonce: 6ehH09
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-16 decoding is now 3x to 4x faster on various inputs. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7705
.. nonce: G0wnRR
.. section: Core and Builtins

asdl_seq and asdl_int_seq are now Py_ssize_t sized.

..

.. bpo: 14133
.. date: 7704
.. nonce: yVntEc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement suppression of __context__ display with an attribute on
BaseException. This replaces the original mechanism of PEP 409. (See also:
PEP 415)

..

.. bpo: 14417
.. date: 7703
.. nonce: WK-y_5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Mutating a dict during lookup now restarts the lookup instead of raising a
RuntimeError (undoes issue #14205).

..

.. bpo: 14738
.. date: 7702
.. nonce: GomjsL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed-up UTF-8 decoding on non-ASCII data.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14700
.. date: 7701
.. nonce: yeRxzo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix two broken and undefined-behaviour-inducing overflow checks in old-style
string formatting.

..

.. bpo: 14690
.. date: 7700
.. nonce: KCO__i
.. section: Library

Use monotonic clock instead of system clock in the sched, subprocess and
trace modules.

..

.. bpo: 14443
.. date: 7699
.. nonce: qIXcCM
.. section: Library

Tell rpmbuild to use the correct version of Python in bdist_rpm. Initial
patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 12515
.. date: 7698
.. nonce: EdFrns
.. section: Library

email now registers a defect if it gets to EOF while parsing a MIME part
without seeing the closing MIME boundary.

..

.. bpo: 1672568
.. date: 7697
.. nonce: s0dvVp
.. section: Library

email now always decodes base64 payloads, adding padding and ignoring non-
base64-alphabet characters if needed, and registering defects for any such
problems.

..

.. bpo: 14925
.. date: 7696
.. nonce: UBaXtP
.. section: Library

email now registers a defect when the parser decides that there is a missing
header/body separator line.  MalformedHeaderDefect, which the existing code
would never actually generate, is deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 10365
.. date: 7695
.. nonce: 7bUDdg
.. section: Library

File open dialog now works instead of crashing even when the parent window
is closed before the dialog. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 8739
.. date: 7694
.. nonce: 4U43mg
.. section: Library

Updated smtpd to support RFC 5321, and added support for the RFC 1870 SIZE
extension.

..

.. bpo: 665194
.. date: 7693
.. nonce: VwFX2F
.. section: Library

Added a localtime function to email.utils to provide an aware local datetime
for use in setting Date headers.

..

.. bpo: 12586
.. date: 7692
.. nonce: iBoYMw
.. section: Library

Added new provisional policies that implement convenient unicode support for
email headers.  See What's New for details.

..

.. bpo: 14731
.. date: 7691
.. nonce: BhZvwi
.. section: Library

Refactored email Policy framework to support full backward compatibility
with Python 3.2 by default yet allow for the introduction of new features
through new policies.  Note that Policy.must_be_7bit is renamed to cte_type.

..

.. bpo: 14876
.. date: 7690
.. nonce: mGSbz9
.. section: Library

Use user-selected font for highlight configuration.

..

.. bpo: 14920
.. date: 7689
.. nonce: hlx1Xf
.. section: Library

Fix the help(urllib.parse) failure on locale C on terminals. Have ascii
characters in help.

..

.. bpo: 14548
.. date: 7688
.. nonce: j5ktG-
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing finalizers check pid before running to cope with
possibility of gc running just after fork.

..

.. bpo: 14036
.. date: 7687
.. nonce: wfrN3N
.. section: Library

Add an additional check to validate that port in urlparse does not go in
illegal range and returns None.

..

.. bpo: 14862
.. date: 7686
.. nonce: ZP8FYK
.. section: Library

Add missing names to os.__all__

..

.. bpo: 14875
.. date: 7685
.. nonce: pGNN-W
.. section: Library

Use float('inf') instead of float('1e66666') in the json module.

..

.. bpo: 13585
.. date: 7684
.. nonce: bWM4lp
.. section: Library

Added contextlib.ExitStack

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7683
.. nonce: eOtSMq
.. section: Library

PEP 3144, Issue #14814: Added the ipaddress module

..

.. bpo: 14426
.. date: 7682
.. nonce: GSay45
.. section: Library

Correct the Date format in Expires attribute of Set-Cookie Header in
Cookie.py.

..

.. bpo: 14588
.. date: 7681
.. nonce: JLjwkU
.. section: Library

The types module now provide new_class() and prepare_class() functions to
support PEP 3115 compliant dynamic class creation. Patch by Daniel Urban and
Nick Coghlan.

..

.. bpo: 13152
.. date: 7680
.. nonce: bmO79R
.. section: Library

Allow to specify a custom tabsize for expanding tabs in textwrap. Patch by
John Feuerstein.

..

.. bpo: 14721
.. date: 7679
.. nonce: n-IAij
.. section: Library

Send the correct 'Content-length: 0' header when the body is an empty string
''. Initial Patch contributed by Arve Knudsen.

..

.. bpo: 14072
.. date: 7678
.. nonce: 4bVZye
.. section: Library

Fix parsing of 'tel' URIs in urlparse by making the check for ports
stricter.

..

.. bpo: 9374
.. date: 7677
.. nonce: 73g_V_
.. section: Library

Generic parsing of query and fragment portions of url for any scheme.
Supported both by RFC3986 and RFC2396.

..

.. bpo: 14798
.. date: 7676
.. nonce: uw_PT-
.. section: Library

Fix the functions in pyclbr to raise an ImportError when the first part of a
dotted name is not a package. Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 12098
.. date: 7675
.. nonce: kcQpDY
.. section: Library

multiprocessing on Windows now starts child processes using the same
sys.flags as the current process.  Initial patch by Sergey Mezentsev.

..

.. bpo: 13031
.. date: 7674
.. nonce: 36cKZE
.. section: Library

Small speed-up for tarfile when unzipping tarfiles. Patch by Justin Peel.

..

.. bpo: 14780
.. date: 7673
.. nonce: mOQ_ES
.. section: Library

urllib.request.urlopen() now has a ``cadefault`` argument to use the default
certificate store.  Initial patch by James Oakley.

..

.. bpo: 14829
.. date: 7672
.. nonce: on72nM
.. section: Library

Fix bisect and range() indexing with large indices (>= 2 ** 32) under 64-bit
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 14732
.. date: 7671
.. nonce: 3fMRiU
.. section: Library

The _csv module now uses PEP 3121 module initialization. Patch by Robin
Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 14809
.. date: 7670
.. nonce: IdiSIH
.. section: Library

Add HTTP status codes introduced by RFC 6585 to http.server and http.client.
Patch by EungJun Yi.

..

.. bpo: 14777
.. date: 7669
.. nonce: hOLi4A
.. section: Library

tkinter may return undecoded UTF-8 bytes as a string when accessing the Tk
clipboard.  Modify clipboad_get() to first request type UTF8_STRING when no
specific type is requested in an X11 windowing environment, falling back to
the current default type STRING if that fails. Original patch by Thomas
Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 14773
.. date: 7668
.. nonce: gWImyJ
.. section: Library

Fix os.fwalk() failing on dangling symlinks.

..

.. bpo: 12541
.. date: 7667
.. nonce: Np6NxR
.. section: Library

Be lenient with quotes around Realm field of HTTP Basic Authentation in
urllib2.

..

.. bpo: 14807
.. date: 7666
.. nonce: DQuJr9
.. section: Library

move undocumented tarfile.filemode() to stat.filemode() and add doc entry.
Add tarfile.filemode alias with deprecation warning.

..

.. bpo: 13815
.. date: 7665
.. nonce: nQCfus
.. section: Library

TarFile.extractfile() now returns io.BufferedReader objects.

..

.. bpo: 14532
.. date: 7664
.. nonce: RR8WDH
.. section: Library

Add a secure_compare() helper to the hmac module, to mitigate timing
attacks. Patch by Jon Oberheide.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7663
.. nonce: kzXdSX
.. section: Library

Add importlib.util.resolve_name().

..

.. bpo: 14366
.. date: 7662
.. nonce: AnbUP0
.. section: Library

Support lzma compression in zip files. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7661
.. nonce: VIJwXJ
.. section: Library

Introduce importlib.find_loader() and document imp.find_module/load_module
as deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 14082
.. date: 7660
.. nonce: jgCzs3
.. section: Library

shutil.copy2() now copies extended attributes, if possible. Patch by Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7659
.. nonce: CCfPrG
.. section: Library

Make importlib.abc.FileLoader.load_module()/get_filename() and
importlib.machinery.ExtensionFileLoader.load_module() have their single
argument be optional. Allows for the replacement (and thus deprecation) of
imp.load_source()/load_package()/load_compiled().

..

.. bpo: 13959
.. date: 7658
.. nonce: Kl6QSe
.. section: Library

imp.get_suffixes() has been deprecated in favour of the new attributes on
importlib.machinery: SOURCE_SUFFIXES, DEBUG_BYTECODE_SUFFIXES,
OPTIMIZED_BYTECODE_SUFFIXES, BYTECODE_SUFFIXES, and EXTENSION_SUFFIXES. This
led to an indirect deprecation of inspect.getmoduleinfo().

..

.. bpo: 14662
.. date: 7657
.. nonce: kBgGen
.. section: Library

Prevent shutil failures on OS X when destination does not support chflag
operations.  Patch by Hynek Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 14157
.. date: 7656
.. nonce: QVP6vO
.. section: Library

Fix time.strptime failing without a year on February 29th. Patch by Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 14753
.. date: 7655
.. nonce: axZ7-L
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing's handling of negative timeouts the same as it was in
Python 3.2.

..

.. bpo: 14583
.. date: 7654
.. nonce: QKYopE
.. section: Library

Fix importlib bug when a package's __init__.py would first import one of its
modules then raise an error.

..

.. bpo: 14741
.. date: 7653
.. nonce: IaSwPq
.. section: Library

Fix missing support for Ellipsis ('...') in parser module.

..

.. bpo: 14697
.. date: 7652
.. nonce: JOYLPW
.. section: Library

Fix missing support for set displays and set comprehensions in parser
module.

..

.. bpo: 14701
.. date: 7651
.. nonce: Meb6lW
.. section: Library

Fix missing support for 'raise ... from' in parser module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7650
.. nonce: wf3uxo
.. section: Library

Add support for timeouts to the acquire() methods of multiprocessing's
lock/semaphore/condition proxies.

..

.. bpo: 13989
.. date: 7649
.. nonce: 5E3_xK
.. section: Library

Add support for text mode to gzip.open().

..

.. bpo: 14127
.. date: 7648
.. nonce: sWvoou
.. section: Library

The os.stat() result object now provides three additional fields:
st_ctime_ns, st_mtime_ns, and st_atime_ns, providing those times as an
integer with nanosecond resolution.  The functions os.utime(), os.lutimes(),
and os.futimes() now accept a new parameter, ns, which accepts mtime and
atime as integers with nanosecond resolution.

..

.. bpo: 14127
.. date: 7647
.. nonce: rdG9eC
.. section: Library

shutil.copystat now preserves exact mtime and atime on filesystems providing
nanosecond resolution. (See also: bpo-10148)

..

.. bpo: 14958
.. date: 7646
.. nonce: bMisLB
.. section: IDLE

Change IDLE systax highlighting to recognize all string and byte literals
supported in Python 3.3.

..

.. bpo: 10997
.. date: 7645
.. nonce: D59Zo_
.. section: IDLE

Prevent a duplicate entry in IDLE's "Recent Files" menu.

..

.. bpo: 14929
.. date: 7644
.. nonce: Aet5nc
.. section: IDLE

Stop IDLE 3.x from closing on Unicode decode errors when grepping. Patch by
Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 12510
.. date: 7643
.. nonce: 4lv3RD
.. section: IDLE

Attempting to get invalid tooltip no longer closes IDLE. Other tooltipss
have been corrected or improved and the number of tests has been tripled.
Original patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 14695
.. date: 7642
.. nonce: BE5pE-
.. section: Tools/Demos

Bring Tools/parser/unparse.py support up to date with the Python 3.3
Grammar.

..

.. bpo: 14472
.. date: 7641
.. nonce: KWzSni
.. section: Build

Update .gitignore. Patch by Matej Cepl.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7640
.. nonce: MbKrTb
.. section: Build

Upgrade Windows library versions: bzip 1.0.6, OpenSSL 1.0.1c.

..

.. bpo: 14693
.. date: 7639
.. nonce: __K1i7
.. section: Build

Under non-Windows platforms, hashlib's fallback modules are always compiled,
even if OpenSSL is present at build time.

..

.. bpo: 13210
.. date: 7638
.. nonce: 7vR33E
.. section: Build

Windows build now uses VS2010, ported from VS2008.

..

.. bpo: 14705
.. date: 7637
.. nonce: rThBL5
.. section: C API

The PyArg_Parse() family of functions now support the 'p' format unit, which
accepts a "boolean predicate" argument.  It converts any Python value into
an integer--0 if it is "false", and 1 otherwise.

..

.. bpo: 14863
.. date: 7636
.. nonce: OHttZr
.. section: Documentation

Update the documentation of os.fdopen() to reflect the fact that it's only a
thin wrapper around open() anymore.

..

.. bpo: 14588
.. date: 7635
.. nonce: VLRx_E
.. section: Documentation

The language reference now accurately documents the Python 3 class
definition process. Patch by Nick Coghlan.

..

.. bpo: 14943
.. date: 7634
.. nonce: SrEzZ7
.. section: Documentation

Correct a default argument value for winreg.OpenKey and correctly list the
argument names in the function's explanation.
