.. bpo: 14172
.. date: 7489
.. nonce: EIbdxW
.. release date: 05-Mar-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leak when marshalling a buffer-like object (other than a bytes
object).

..

.. bpo: 13521
.. date: 7488
.. nonce: L_inbK
.. section: Core and Builtins

dict.setdefault() now does only one lookup for the given key, making it
"atomic" for many purposes.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7487
.. nonce: Y9s9QE
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 409, Issue #6210: "raise X from None" is now supported as a means of
suppressing the display of the chained exception context. The chained
context still remains available as the __context__ attribute.

..

.. bpo: 10181
.. date: 7486
.. nonce: QFiREN
.. section: Core and Builtins

New memoryview implementation fixes multiple ownership and lifetime issues
of dynamically allocated Py_buffer members (#9990) as well as crashes
(#8305, #7433). Many new features have been added (See whatsnew/3.3), and
the documentation has been updated extensively. The ndarray test object from
_testbuffer.c implements all aspects of PEP-3118, so further development
towards the complete implementation of the PEP can proceed in a test-driven
manner.

Thanks to Nick Coghlan, Antoine Pitrou and Pauli Virtanen for review and
many ideas.

..

.. bpo: 12834
.. date: 7485
.. nonce: lZTD8W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect results of memoryview.tobytes() for non-contiguous arrays.

..

.. bpo: 5231
.. date: 7484
.. nonce: 7QZAi1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Introduce memoryview.cast() method that allows changing format and shape
without making a copy of the underlying memory.

..

.. bpo: 14084
.. date: 7483
.. nonce: VVBkOk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a file descriptor leak when importing a module with a bad encoding.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7482
.. nonce: BPfFYz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade Unicode data to Unicode 6.1.

..

.. bpo: 14040
.. date: 7481
.. nonce: PgP41A
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove rarely used file name suffixes for C extensions (under POSIX mainly).

..

.. bpo: 14051
.. date: 7480
.. nonce: a174tR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow arbitrary attributes to be set of classmethod and staticmethod.

..

.. bpo: 13703
.. date: 7479
.. nonce: bP-Abj
.. section: Core and Builtins

oCERT-2011-003: Randomize hashes of str and bytes to protect against denial
of service attacks due to hash collisions within the dict and set types.
Patch by David Malcolm, based on work by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 13020
.. date: 7478
.. nonce: 7y51PJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference leak when allocating a structsequence object fails.  Patch
by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 13908
.. date: 7477
.. nonce: gY7-0t
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ready types returned from PyType_FromSpec.

..

.. bpo: 11235
.. date: 7476
.. nonce: 6wzkv-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix OverflowError when trying to import a source file whose modification
time doesn't fit in a 32-bit timestamp.

..

.. bpo: 12705
.. date: 7475
.. nonce: E1UO3x
.. section: Core and Builtins

A SyntaxError exception is now raised when attempting to compile multiple
statements as a single interactive statement.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7474
.. nonce: URLqbf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the builtin module initialization code to store the init function for
future reinitialization.

..

.. bpo: 8052
.. date: 7473
.. nonce: i5F_0O
.. section: Core and Builtins

The posix subprocess module would take a long time closing all possible file
descriptors in the child process rather than just open file descriptors.  It
now closes only the open fds if possible for the default close_fds=True
behavior.

..

.. bpo: 13629
.. date: 7472
.. nonce: ZzOj6B
.. section: Core and Builtins

Renumber the tokens in token.h so that they match the indexes into
_PyParser_TokenNames.

..

.. bpo: 13752
.. date: 7471
.. nonce: zb4RK_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a casefold() method to str.

..

.. bpo: 13761
.. date: 7470
.. nonce: ZkU_de
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a "flush" keyword argument to the print() function, used to ensure
flushing the output stream.

..

.. bpo: 13645
.. date: 7469
.. nonce: 7elNwY
.. section: Core and Builtins

pyc files now contain the size of the corresponding source code, to avoid
timestamp collisions (especially on filesystems with a low timestamp
resolution) when checking for freshness of the bytecode.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7468
.. nonce: PaHwFO
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 380, Issue #11682: Add "yield from <x>" to support easy delegation to
subgenerators (initial patch by Greg Ewing, integration into 3.3 by Renaud
Blanch, Ryan Kelly, Zbigniew Jędrzejewski-Szmek and Nick Coghlan)

..

.. bpo: 13748
.. date: 7467
.. nonce: n9rlfR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raw bytes literals can now be written with the ``rb`` prefix as well as
``br``.

..

.. bpo: 12736
.. date: 7466
.. nonce: l91PiA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use full unicode case mappings for upper, lower, and title case.

..

.. bpo: 12760
.. date: 7465
.. nonce: ao9dmi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a create mode to open(). Patch by David Townshend.

..

.. bpo: 13738
.. date: 7464
.. nonce: M9VOMZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Simplify implementation of bytes.lower() and bytes.upper().

..

.. bpo: 13577
.. date: 7463
.. nonce: r9XUQK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Built-in methods and functions now have a __qualname__. Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 6695
.. date: 7462
.. nonce: SH6ELR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Full garbage collection runs now clear the freelist of set objects.  Initial
patch by Matthias Troffaes.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7461
.. nonce: tPq2HD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix OSError.__init__ and OSError.__new__ so that each of them can be
overriden and take additional arguments (followup to issue #12555).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7460
.. nonce: 2J4kRL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the fix for issue #12149: it was incorrect, although it had the side
effect of appearing to resolve the issue.  Thanks to Mark Shannon for
noticing.

..

.. bpo: 13505
.. date: 7459
.. nonce: -fVx4a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Pickle bytes objects in a way that is compatible with Python 2 when using
protocols <= 2.

..

.. bpo: 11147
.. date: 7458
.. nonce: GGZMRG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an unused argument in _Py_ANNOTATE_MEMORY_ORDER.  (Fix given by Campbell
Barton).

..

.. bpo: 13503
.. date: 7457
.. nonce: CguNef
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use a more efficient reduction format for bytearrays with pickle protocol >=
3.  The old reduction format is kept with older protocols in order to allow
unpickling under Python 2.  Patch by Irmen de Jong.

..

.. bpo: 7111
.. date: 7456
.. nonce: jT9r7r
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python can now be run without a stdin, stdout or stderr stream.  It was
already the case with Python 2.  However, the corresponding sys module
entries are now set to None (instead of an unusable file object).

..

.. bpo: 11849
.. date: 7455
.. nonce: CGVEGl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that free()d memory arenas are really released on POSIX systems
supporting anonymous memory mappings.  Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7454
.. nonce: Qf63qA
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3155 / issue #13448: Qualified name for classes and functions.

..

.. bpo: 13436
.. date: 7453
.. nonce: aJdgA5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bogus error message when an AST object was passed an invalid integer
value.

..

.. bpo: 13411
.. date: 7452
.. nonce: ck2a71
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview objects are now hashable when the underlying object is hashable.

..

.. bpo: 13338
.. date: 7451
.. nonce: FFZr2K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Handle all enumerations in _Py_ANNOTATE_MEMORY_ORDER to allow compiling
extension modules with -Wswitch-enum on gcc. Initial patch by Floris
Bruynooghe.

..

.. bpo: 10227
.. date: 7450
.. nonce: 3RxtLE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add an allocation cache for a single slice object.  Patch by Stefan Behnel.

..

.. bpo: 13393
.. date: 7449
.. nonce: e0t8-t
.. section: Core and Builtins

BufferedReader.read1() now asks the full requested size to the raw stream
instead of limiting itself to the buffer size.

..

.. bpo: 13392
.. date: 7448
.. nonce: Vo4LlN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Writing a pyc file should now be atomic under Windows as well.

..

.. bpo: 13333
.. date: 7447
.. nonce: jkzjPN
.. section: Core and Builtins

The UTF-7 decoder now accepts lone surrogates (the encoder already accepts
them).

..

.. bpo: 13389
.. date: 7446
.. nonce: XpcClS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Full garbage collection passes now clear the freelists for list and dict
objects.  They already cleared other freelists in the interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 13327
.. date: 7445
.. nonce: IrE-_j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the need for an explicit None as the second argument to os.utime,
os.lutimes, os.futimes, os.futimens, os.futimesat, in order to update to the
current time. Also added keyword argument handling to os.utimensat in order
to remove the need for explicit None.

..

.. bpo: 13350
.. date: 7444
.. nonce: IYeSXA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Simplify some C code by replacing most usages of PyUnicode_Format by
PyUnicode_FromFormat.

..

.. bpo: 13342
.. date: 7443
.. nonce: _ddnpI
.. section: Core and Builtins

input() used to ignore sys.stdin's and sys.stdout's unicode error handler in
interactive mode (when calling into PyOS_Readline()).

..

.. bpo: 9896
.. date: 7442
.. nonce: xYsm94
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add start, stop, and step attributes to range objects.

..

.. bpo: 13343
.. date: 7441
.. nonce: rrKCUj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a SystemError when a lambda expression uses a global variable in the
default value of a keyword-only argument: ``lambda *, arg=GLOBAL_NAME:
None``

..

.. bpo: 12797
.. date: 7440
.. nonce: Bx-Rhh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added custom opener parameter to builtin open() and FileIO.open().

..

.. bpo: 10519
.. date: 7439
.. nonce: vnPUhZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid unnecessary recursive function calls in setobject.c.

..

.. bpo: 10363
.. date: 7438
.. nonce: Sa4BVo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deallocate global locks in Py_Finalize().

..

.. bpo: 13018
.. date: 7437
.. nonce: WRySxn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leaks in error paths in dictobject.c. Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 13201
.. date: 7436
.. nonce: sAT1nr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Define '==' and '!=' to compare range objects based on the sequence of
values they define (instead of comparing based on object identity).

..

.. bpo: 1294232
.. date: 7435
.. nonce: G92P2p
.. section: Core and Builtins

In a few cases involving metaclass inheritance, the interpreter would
sometimes invoke the wrong metaclass when building a new class object. These
cases now behave correctly. Patch by Daniel Urban.

..

.. bpo: 12753
.. date: 7434
.. nonce: jEQ_Mi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add support for Unicode name aliases and named sequences. Both
``unicodedata.lookup()`` and '\N{...}' now resolve aliases, and
``unicodedata.lookup()`` resolves named sequences too.

..

.. bpo: 12170
.. date: 7433
.. nonce: gjr_dY
.. section: Core and Builtins

The count(), find(), rfind(), index() and rindex() methods of bytes and
bytearray objects now accept an integer between 0 and 255 as their first
argument.  Patch by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 12604
.. date: 7432
.. nonce: dDegux
.. section: Core and Builtins

VTRACE macro expanded to no-op in _sre.c to avoid compiler warnings. Patch
by Josh Triplett and Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 12281
.. date: 7431
.. nonce: HflTkX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Rewrite the MBCS codec to handle correctly replace and ignore error handlers
on all Windows versions. The MBCS codec is now supporting all error
handlers, instead of only replace to encode and ignore to decode.

..

.. bpo: 13188
.. date: 7430
.. nonce: L3o2X6
.. section: Core and Builtins

When called without an explicit traceback argument, generator.throw() now
gets the traceback from the passed exception's ``__traceback__`` attribute.
Patch by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 13146
.. date: 7429
.. nonce: DVyExe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Writing a pyc file is now atomic under POSIX.

..

.. bpo: 7833
.. date: 7428
.. nonce: NcSnnJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extension modules built using distutils on Windows will no longer include a
"manifest" to prevent them failing at import time in some embedded
situations.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7427
.. nonce: cOixWQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3151 / issue #12555: reworking the OS and IO exception hierarchy.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7426
.. nonce: jCkmJ2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add internal API for static strings (_Py_identifier et al.).

..

.. bpo: 13063
.. date: 7425
.. nonce: M1ythv
.. section: Core and Builtins

the Windows error ERROR_NO_DATA (numbered 232 and described as "The pipe is
being closed") is now mapped to POSIX errno EPIPE (previously EINVAL).

..

.. bpo: 12911
.. date: 7424
.. nonce: eaStd5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory consumption when calculating the repr() of huge tuples or lists.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7423
.. nonce: TX076B
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 393: flexible string representation. Thanks to Torsten Becker for the
initial implementation, and Victor Stinner for various bug fixes.

..

.. bpo: 14081
.. date: 7422
.. nonce: RCvMnQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

The 'sep' and 'maxsplit' parameter to str.split, bytes.split, and
bytearray.split may now be passed as keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 13012
.. date: 7421
.. nonce: Pgdzzz
.. section: Core and Builtins

The 'keepends' parameter to str.splitlines may now be passed as a keyword
argument: "my_string.splitlines(keepends=True)".  The same change also
applies to bytes.splitlines and bytearray.splitlines.

..

.. bpo: 7732
.. date: 7420
.. nonce: lvOdIm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't open a directory as a file anymore while importing a module. Ignore
the direcotry if its name matchs the module name (e.g. "__init__.py") and
raise a ImportError instead.

..

.. bpo: 13021
.. date: 7419
.. nonce: Trg0Hn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Missing decref on an error path.  Thanks to Suman Saha for finding the bug
and providing a patch.

..

.. bpo: 12973
.. date: 7418
.. nonce: e4aYqm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checks that relied on undefined behaviour in list_repeat
(listobject.c) and islice_next (itertoolsmodule.c).  These bugs caused test
failures with recent versions of Clang.

..

.. bpo: 12904
.. date: 7417
.. nonce: qJIaiS
.. section: Core and Builtins

os.utime, os.futimes, os.lutimes, and os.futimesat now write atime and mtime
with nanosecond precision on modern POSIX platforms.

..

.. bpo: 12802
.. date: 7416
.. nonce: 4d4MIG
.. section: Core and Builtins

the Windows error ERROR_DIRECTORY (numbered 267) is now mapped to POSIX
errno ENOTDIR (previously EINVAL).

..

.. bpo: 9200
.. date: 7415
.. nonce: a9QbTm
.. section: Core and Builtins

The str.is* methods now work with strings that contain non-BMP characters
even in narrow Unicode builds.

..

.. bpo: 12791
.. date: 7414
.. nonce: iYGwxc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Break reference cycles early when a generator exits with an exception.

..

.. bpo: 12773
.. date: 7413
.. nonce: cLC6Zy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make __doc__ mutable on user-defined classes.

..

.. bpo: 12766
.. date: 7412
.. nonce: eWT3Pm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a ValueError when creating a class with a class variable that
conflicts with a name in __slots__.

..

.. bpo: 12266
.. date: 7411
.. nonce: SifsgD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix str.capitalize() to correctly uppercase/lowercase titlecased and cased
non-letter characters.

..

.. bpo: 12732
.. date: 7410
.. nonce: x8wK_7
.. section: Core and Builtins

In narrow unicode builds, allow Unicode identifiers which fall outside the
BMP.

..

.. bpo: 12575
.. date: 7409
.. nonce: gwHPe_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Validate user-generated AST before it is compiled.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7408
.. nonce: ySbpe4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make type(None), type(Ellipsis), and type(NotImplemented) callable. They
return the respective singleton instances.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7407
.. nonce: hMvppx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Forbid summing bytes with sum().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7406
.. nonce: ekK5i_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Verify the types of AST strings and identifiers provided by the user before
compiling them.

..

.. bpo: 12647
.. date: 7405
.. nonce: uFzi8V
.. section: Core and Builtins

The None object now has a __bool__() method that returns False. Formerly,
bool(None) returned False only because of special case logic in
PyObject_IsTrue().

..

.. bpo: 12579
.. date: 7404
.. nonce: 1IV9fF
.. section: Core and Builtins

str.format_map() now raises a ValueError if used on a format string that
contains positional fields. Initial patch by Julian Berman.

..

.. bpo: 10271
.. date: 7403
.. nonce: IgMmt7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow warnings.showwarning() be any callable.

..

.. bpo: 11627
.. date: 7402
.. nonce: ytCeOw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when __new__ on a exception returns a non-exception class.

..

.. bpo: 12149
.. date: 7401
.. nonce: Hjc2bt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update the method cache after a type's dictionary gets cleared by the
garbage collector.  This fixes a segfault when an instance and its type get
caught in a reference cycle, and the instance's deallocator calls one of the
methods on the type (e.g. when subclassing IOBase).  Diagnosis and patch by
Davide Rizzo.

..

.. bpo: 9611
.. date: 7400
.. nonce: CZATl_
.. section: Core and Builtins

FileIO.read() clamps the length to INT_MAX on Windows. (See also: bpo-9015)

..

.. bpo: 9642
.. date: 7399
.. nonce: v4SQuc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Uniformize the tests on the availability of the mbcs codec, add a new
HAVE_MBCS define.

..

.. bpo: 9642
.. date: 7398
.. nonce: 0y1U2x
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix filesystem encoding initialization: use the ANSI code page on Windows if
the mbcs codec is not available, and fail with a fatal error if we cannot
get the locale encoding (if nl_langinfo(CODESET) is not available) instead
of using UTF-8.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7397
.. nonce: 4EZiX-
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a generator yields, do not retain the caller's exception state on the
generator.

..

.. bpo: 12475
.. date: 7396
.. nonce: lTWJoJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent generators from leaking their exception state into the caller's
frame as they return for the last time.

..

.. bpo: 12291
.. date: 7395
.. nonce: cXyNIL
.. section: Core and Builtins

You can now load multiple marshalled objects from a stream, with other data
interleaved between marshalled objects.

..

.. bpo: 12356
.. date: 7394
.. nonce: yh7hqW
.. section: Core and Builtins

When required positional or keyword-only arguments are not given, produce a
informative error message which includes the name(s) of the missing
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 12370
.. date: 7393
.. nonce: qKZlUk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix super with no arguments when __class__ is overriden in the class body.

..

.. bpo: 12084
.. date: 7392
.. nonce: n1GJBF
.. section: Core and Builtins

os.stat on Windows now works properly with relative symbolic links when
called from any directory.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7391
.. nonce: rqj-q7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Loosen type restrictions on the __dir__ method. __dir__ can now return any
sequence, which will be converted to a list and sorted by dir().

..

.. bpo: 12265
.. date: 7390
.. nonce: I2_oGy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make error messages produced by passing an invalid set of arguments to a
function more informative.

..

.. bpo: 12225
.. date: 7389
.. nonce: VVvUqO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Still allow Python to build if Python is not in its hg repo or mercurial is
not installed.

..

.. bpo: 1195
.. date: 7388
.. nonce: Tp_J8Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

my_fgets() now always clears errors before calling fgets(). Fix the
following case: sys.stdin.read() stopped with CTRL+d (end of file),
raw_input() interrupted by CTRL+c.

..

.. bpo: 12216
.. date: 7387
.. nonce: Edw6xv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow unexpected EOF errors to happen on any line of the file.

..

.. bpo: 12199
.. date: 7386
.. nonce: oPGGQc
.. section: Core and Builtins

The TryExcept and TryFinally and AST nodes have been unified into a Try
node.

..

.. bpo: 9670
.. date: 7385
.. nonce: D4p50W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Increase the default stack size for secondary threads on Mac OS X and
FreeBSD to reduce the chances of a crash instead of a "maximum recursion
depth" RuntimeError exception. (patch by Ronald Oussoren)

..

.. bpo: 12106
.. date: 7384
.. nonce: 9GzRO0
.. section: Core and Builtins

The use of the multiple-with shorthand syntax is now reflected in the AST.

..

.. bpo: 12190
.. date: 7383
.. nonce: riY6Gl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Try to use the same filename object when compiling unmarshalling a code
objects in the same file.

..

.. bpo: 12166
.. date: 7382
.. nonce: na7Vys
.. section: Core and Builtins

Move implementations of dir() specialized for various types into the
__dir__() methods of those types.

..

.. bpo: 5715
.. date: 7381
.. nonce: Vs9Y33
.. section: Core and Builtins

In socketserver, close the server socket in the child process.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7380
.. nonce: n-R2nr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correct lookup of __dir__ on objects. Among other things, this causes errors
besides AttributeError found on lookup to be propagated.

..

.. bpo: 12060
.. date: 7379
.. nonce: g_FUU8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use sig_atomic_t type and volatile keyword in the signal module. Patch
written by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 1746656
.. date: 7378
.. nonce: tqS2BI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added the if_nameindex, if_indextoname, if_nametoindex methods to the socket
module.

..

.. bpo: 12044
.. date: 7377
.. nonce: BmuRsU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed subprocess.Popen when used as a context manager to wait for the
process to end when exiting the context to avoid unintentionally leaving
zombie processes around.

..

.. bpo: 1195
.. date: 7376
.. nonce: rUvlec
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix input() if it is interrupted by CTRL+d and then CTRL+c, clear the end-
of-file indicator after CTRL+d.

..

.. bpo: 1856
.. date: 7375
.. nonce: rNKlZ0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid crashes and lockups when daemon threads run while the interpreter is
shutting down; instead, these threads are now killed when they try to take
the GIL.

..

.. bpo: 9756
.. date: 7374
.. nonce: L962XN
.. section: Core and Builtins

When calling a method descriptor or a slot wrapper descriptor, the check of
the object type doesn't read the __class__ attribute anymore. Fix a crash if
a class override its __class__ attribute (e.g. a proxy of the str type).
Patch written by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 10517
.. date: 7373
.. nonce: eHRgPe
.. section: Core and Builtins

After fork(), reinitialize the TLS used by the PyGILState_* APIs, to avoid a
crash with the pthread implementation in RHEL 5.  Patch by Charles-François
Natali.

..

.. bpo: 10914
.. date: 7372
.. nonce: awEeE9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Initialize correctly the filesystem codec when creating a new subinterpreter
to fix a bootstrap issue with codecs implemented in Python, as the
ISO-8859-15 codec.

..

.. bpo: 11918
.. date: 7371
.. nonce: yWsyik
.. section: Core and Builtins

OS/2 and VMS are no more supported because of the lack of maintainer.

..

.. bpo: 6780
.. date: 7370
.. nonce: MS1yFK
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix starts/endswith error message to mention that tuples are accepted too.

..

.. bpo: 5057
.. date: 7369
.. nonce: IXmDaW
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix a bug in the peepholer that led to non-portable pyc files between narrow
and wide builds while optimizing BINARY_SUBSCR on non-BMP chars (e.g.
"\U00012345"[0]).

..

.. bpo: 11845
.. date: 7368
.. nonce: ngWKb1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix typo in rangeobject.c that caused a crash in compute_slice_indices.
Patch by Daniel Urban.

..

.. bpo: 5673
.. date: 7367
.. nonce: dGp29g
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added a `timeout` keyword argument to subprocess.Popen.wait,
subprocess.Popen.communicated, subprocess.call, subprocess.check_call, and
subprocess.check_output.  If the blocking operation takes more than
`timeout` seconds, the `subprocess.TimeoutExpired` exception is raised.

..

.. bpo: 11650
.. date: 7366
.. nonce: r47Jvk
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyOS_StdioReadline() retries fgets() if it was interrupted (EINTR), for
example if the program is stopped with CTRL+z on Mac OS X. Patch written by
Charles-Francois Natali.

..

.. bpo: 9319
.. date: 7365
.. nonce: 5iFHdl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Include the filename in "Non-UTF8 code ..." syntax error.

..

.. bpo: 10785
.. date: 7364
.. nonce: KbV-Sq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Store the filename as Unicode in the Python parser.

..

.. bpo: 11619
.. date: 7363
.. nonce: EpEKh2
.. section: Core and Builtins

_PyImport_LoadDynamicModule() doesn't encode the path to bytes on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 10998
.. date: 7362
.. nonce: icOAMv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove mentions of -Q, sys.flags.division_warning and Py_DivisionWarningFlag
left over from Python 2.

..

.. bpo: 11244
.. date: 7361
.. nonce: TiVSZZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove an unnecessary peepholer check that was preventing negative zeros
from being constant-folded properly.

..

.. bpo: 11395
.. date: 7360
.. nonce: Vuabxg
.. section: Core and Builtins

io.FileIO().write() clamps the data length to 32,767 bytes on Windows if the
file is a TTY to workaround a Windows bug. The Windows console returns an
error (12: not enough space error) on writing into stdout if stdout mode is
binary and the length is greater than 66,000 bytes (or less, depending on
heap usage).

..

.. bpo: 11320
.. date: 7359
.. nonce: -ThQCa
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix bogus memory management in Modules/getpath.c, leading to a possible
crash when calling Py_SetPath().

..

.. bpo: 11432
.. date: 7358
.. nonce: BDhvsw
.. section: Core and Builtins

A bug was introduced in subprocess.Popen on posix systems with 3.2.0 where
the stdout or stderr file descriptor being the same as the stdin file
descriptor would raise an exception. webbrowser.open would fail. fixed.

..

.. bpo: 9856
.. date: 7357
.. nonce: i962fk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change object.__format__ with a non-empty format string to be a
DeprecationWarning. In 3.2 it was a PendingDeprecationWarning. In 3.4 it
will be a TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 11244
.. date: 7356
.. nonce: lpiV2g
.. section: Core and Builtins

The peephole optimizer is now able to constant-fold arbitrarily complex
expressions.  This also fixes a 3.2 regression where operations involving
negative numbers were not constant-folded.

..

.. bpo: 11450
.. date: 7355
.. nonce: ulI9xJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't truncate hg version info in Py_GetBuildInfo() when there are many tags
(e.g. when using mq).  Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 11335
.. date: 7354
.. nonce: zNrvqZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a memory leak in list.sort when the key function throws an exception.

..

.. bpo: 8923
.. date: 7353
.. nonce: Z1M55I
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a string is encoded to UTF-8 in strict mode, the result is cached into
the object. Examples: str.encode(), str.encode('utf-8'),
PyUnicode_AsUTF8String() and PyUnicode_AsEncodedString(unicode, "utf-8",
NULL).

..

.. bpo: 10829
.. date: 7352
.. nonce: FxQTnG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Refactor PyUnicode_FromFormat(), use the same function to parse the format
string in the 3 steps, fix crashs on invalid format strings.

..

.. bpo: 13007
.. date: 7351
.. nonce: 6OcUii
.. section: Core and Builtins

whichdb should recognize gdbm 1.9 magic numbers.

..

.. bpo: 11286
.. date: 7350
.. nonce: gH7JY2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a ValueError from calling PyMemoryView_FromBuffer with a buffer struct
having a NULL data pointer.

..

.. bpo: 11272
.. date: 7349
.. nonce: TunnAk
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Windows, input() strips '\r' (and not only '\n'), and sys.stdin uses
universal newline (replace '\r\n' by '\n').

..

.. bpo: 11828
.. date: 7348
.. nonce: Lc13S7
.. section: Core and Builtins

startswith and endswith now accept None as slice index. Patch by Torsten
Becker.

..

.. bpo: 11168
.. date: 7347
.. nonce: 15IHEN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove filename debug variable from PyEval_EvalFrameEx(). It encoded the
Unicode filename to UTF-8, but the encoding fails on undecodable filename
(on surrogate characters) which raises an unexpected UnicodeEncodeError on
recursion limit.

..

.. bpo: 11187
.. date: 7346
.. nonce: RF722f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove bootstrap code (use ASCII) of PyUnicode_AsEncodedString(), it was
replaced by a better fallback (use the locale encoding) in
PyUnicode_EncodeFSDefault().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7345
.. nonce: fny7_S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check for NULL result in PyType_FromSpec.

..

.. bpo: 10516
.. date: 7344
.. nonce: Dx9IO6
.. section: Core and Builtins

New copy() and clear() methods for lists and bytearrays.

..

.. bpo: 11386
.. date: 7343
.. nonce: wrrB8K
.. section: Core and Builtins

bytearray.pop() now throws IndexError when the bytearray is empty, instead
of OverflowError.

..

.. bpo: 12380
.. date: 7342
.. nonce: sl5Ilr
.. section: Core and Builtins

The rjust, ljust and center methods of bytes and bytearray now accept a
bytearray argument.

..

.. bpo: 14195
.. date: 7341
.. nonce: XpCJYQ
.. section: Library

An issue that caused weakref.WeakSet instances to incorrectly return True
for a WeakSet instance 'a' in both 'a < a' and 'a > a' has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 14166
.. date: 7340
.. nonce: fcft89
.. section: Library

Pickler objects now have an optional ``dispatch_table`` attribute which
allows to set custom per-pickler reduction functions. Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 14177
.. date: 7339
.. nonce: YskuFD
.. section: Library

marshal.loads() now raises TypeError when given an unicode string.  Patch by
Guilherme Gonçalves.

..

.. bpo: 13550
.. date: 7338
.. nonce: hExG3C
.. section: Library

Remove the debug machinery from the threading module: remove verbose
arguments from all threading classes and functions.

..

.. bpo: 14159
.. date: 7337
.. nonce: bKhLkF
.. section: Library

Fix the len() of weak containers (WeakSet, WeakKeyDictionary,
WeakValueDictionary) to return a better approximation when some objects are
dead or dying.  Moreover, the implementation is now O(1) rather than O(n).

..

.. bpo: 11841
.. date: 7336
.. nonce: YAW9qW
.. section: Library

Fix comparison bug with 'rc' versions in packaging.version. Patch by Filip
Gruszczyński.

..

.. bpo: 6884
.. date: 7335
.. nonce: -lAxmo
.. section: Library

Fix long-standing bugs with MANIFEST.in parsing in distutils on Windows.
Also fixed in packaging.

..

.. bpo: 8033
.. date: 7334
.. nonce: vZ-AWU
.. section: Library

sqlite3: Fix 64-bit integer handling in user functions on 32-bit
architectures. Initial patch by Philippe Devalkeneer.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7333
.. nonce: Apd_xz
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle slashes in the start tag.

..

.. bpo: 13641
.. date: 7332
.. nonce: 8ukIOL
.. section: Library

Decoding functions in the base64 module now accept ASCII-only unicode
strings.  Patch by Catalin Iacob.

..

.. bpo: 14043
.. date: 7331
.. nonce: _NfA3s
.. section: Library

Speed up importlib's _FileFinder by at least 8x, and add a new
importlib.invalidate_caches() function.

..

.. bpo: 14001
.. date: 7330
.. nonce: Za_h38
.. section: Library

CVE-2012-0845: xmlrpc: Fix an endless loop in SimpleXMLRPCServer upon
malformed POST request.

..

.. bpo: 13961
.. date: 7329
.. nonce: -8iWm5
.. section: Library

Move importlib over to using os.replace() for atomic renaming.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7328
.. nonce: lz9SSu
.. section: Library

Do away with ambiguous level values (as suggested by PEP 328) in
importlib.__import__() by raising ValueError when level < 0.

..

.. bpo: 2489
.. date: 7327
.. nonce: EENP1J
.. section: Library

pty.spawn could consume 100% cpu when it encountered an EOF.

..

.. bpo: 13014
.. date: 7326
.. nonce: bfZLHS
.. section: Library

Fix a possible reference leak in SSLSocket.getpeercert().

..

.. bpo: 13777
.. date: 7325
.. nonce: SsSNVv
.. section: Library

Add PF_SYSTEM sockets on OS X. Patch by Michael Goderbauer.

..

.. bpo: 13015
.. date: 7324
.. nonce: bxws6S
.. section: Library

Fix a possible reference leak in defaultdict.__repr__. Patch by Suman Saha.

..

.. bpo: 1326113
.. date: 7323
.. nonce: JuJ1F3
.. section: Library

distutils' and packaging's build_ext commands option now correctly parses
multiple values (separated by whitespace or commas) given to their
--libraries option.

..

.. bpo: 10287
.. date: 7322
.. nonce: L2-2gu
.. section: Library

nntplib now queries the server's CAPABILITIES first before sending MODE
READER, and only sends it if not already in READER mode. Patch by Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 13993
.. date: 7321
.. nonce: YbS9iY
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle broken end tags when strict=False.

..

.. bpo: 13930
.. date: 7320
.. nonce: 566-Kx
.. section: Library

lib2to3 now supports writing converted output files to another directory
tree as well as copying unchanged files and altering the file suffix.

..

.. bpo: 9750
.. date: 7319
.. nonce: CsQyVM
.. section: Library

Fix sqlite3.Connection.iterdump on tables and fields with a name that is a
keyword or contains quotes. Patch by Marko Kohtala.

..

.. bpo: 10287
.. date: 7318
.. nonce: CoOp6o
.. section: Library

nntplib now queries the server's CAPABILITIES again after authenticating
(since the result may change, according to RFC 4643). Patch by Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 13590
.. date: 7317
.. nonce: b6Qvrj
.. section: Library

On OS X 10.7 and 10.6 with Xcode 4.2, building Distutils-based packages with
C extension modules may fail because Apple has removed gcc-4.2, the version
used to build python.org 64-bit/32-bit Pythons.  If the user does not
explicitly override the default C compiler by setting the CC environment
variable, Distutils will now attempt to compile extension modules with clang
if gcc-4.2 is required but not found. Also as a convenience, if the user
does explicitly set CC, substitute its value as the default compiler in the
Distutils LDSHARED configuration variable for OS X. (Note, the python.org
32-bit-only Pythons use gcc-4.0 and the 10.4u SDK, neither of which are
available in Xcode 4.  This change does not attempt to override settings to
support their use with Xcode 4.)

..

.. bpo: 13960
.. date: 7316
.. nonce: WgabCW
.. section: Library

HTMLParser is now able to handle broken comments when strict=False.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7315
.. nonce: rEkvHU
.. section: Library

When '' is a path (e.g. in sys.path), make sure __file__ uses the current
working directory instead of '' in importlib.

..

.. bpo: 13609
.. date: 7314
.. nonce: QHLCY9
.. section: Library

Add two functions to query the terminal size: os.get_terminal_size (low
level) and shutil.get_terminal_size (high level). Patch by Zbigniew
Jędrzejewski-Szmek.

..

.. bpo: 13845
.. date: 7313
.. nonce: tUl_Fj
.. section: Library

On Windows, time.time() now uses GetSystemTimeAsFileTime() instead of
ftime() to have a resolution of 100 ns instead of 1 ms (the clock accuracy
is between 0.5 ms and 15 ms).

..

.. bpo: 13846
.. date: 7312
.. nonce: jybi5V
.. section: Library

Add time.monotonic(), monotonic clock.

..

.. bpo: 8184
.. date: 7311
.. nonce: iGHxT1
.. section: Library

multiprocessing: On Windows, don't set SO_REUSEADDR on Connection sockets,
and set FILE_FLAG_FIRST_PIPE_INSTANCE on named pipes, to make sure two
listeners can't bind to the same socket/pipe (or any existing socket/pipe).

..

.. bpo: 10811
.. date: 7310
.. nonce: m6b_ZC
.. section: Library

Fix recursive usage of cursors. Instead of crashing, raise a
ProgrammingError now.

..

.. bpo: 13734
.. date: 7309
.. nonce: oNGx9P
.. section: Library

Add os.fwalk(), a directory walking function yielding file descriptors.

..

.. bpo: 2945
.. date: 7308
.. nonce: QZCfeH
.. section: Library

Make the distutils upload command aware of bdist_rpm products.

..

.. bpo: 13712
.. date: 7307
.. nonce: TZT3QQ
.. section: Library

pysetup create should not convert package_data to extra_files.

..

.. bpo: 11805
.. date: 7306
.. nonce: VPRRt7
.. section: Library

package_data in setup.cfg should allow more than one value.

..

.. bpo: 13676
.. date: 7305
.. nonce: IwPgKL
.. section: Library

Handle strings with embedded zeros correctly in sqlite3.

..

.. bpo: 8828
.. date: 7304
.. nonce: OhtMcM
.. section: Library

Add new function os.replace(), for cross-platform renaming with overwriting.

..

.. bpo: 13848
.. date: 7303
.. nonce: xXW1hU
.. section: Library

open() and the FileIO constructor now check for NUL characters in the file
name.  Patch by Hynek Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 13806
.. date: 7302
.. nonce: Y34Lg3
.. section: Library

The size check in audioop decompression functions was too strict and could
reject valid compressed data.  Patch by Oleg Plakhotnyuk.

..

.. bpo: 13812
.. date: 7301
.. nonce: NIY-Po
.. section: Library

When a multiprocessing Process child raises an exception, flush stderr after
printing the exception traceback.

..

.. bpo: 13885
.. date: 7300
.. nonce: fTNryk
.. section: Library

CVE-2011-3389: the _ssl module would always disable the CBC IV attack
countermeasure.

..

.. bpo: 13847
.. date: 7299
.. nonce: Ik2pgR
.. section: Library

time.localtime() and time.gmtime() now raise an OSError instead of
ValueError on failure. time.ctime() and time.asctime() now raises an OSError
if localtime() failed. time.clock() now raises a RuntimeError if the
processor time used is not available or its value cannot be represented

..

.. bpo: 13772
.. date: 7298
.. nonce: KVupSi
.. section: Library

In os.symlink() under Windows, do not try to guess the link target's type
(file or directory).  The detection was buggy and made the call non-atomic
(therefore prone to race conditions).

..

.. bpo: 6631
.. date: 7297
.. nonce: FyxhCp
.. section: Library

Disallow relative file paths in urllib urlopen methods.

..

.. bpo: 13722
.. date: 7296
.. nonce: n4Xufh
.. section: Library

Avoid silencing ImportErrors when initializing the codecs registry.

..

.. bpo: 13781
.. date: 7295
.. nonce: Bx-sIy
.. section: Library

Fix GzipFile bug that caused an exception to be raised when opening for
writing using a fileobj returned by os.fdopen().

..

.. bpo: 13803
.. date: 7294
.. nonce: WnPIts
.. section: Library

Under Solaris, distutils doesn't include bitness in the directory name.

..

.. bpo: 10278
.. date: 7293
.. nonce: cLI3aW
.. section: Library

Add time.wallclock() function, monotonic clock.

..

.. bpo: 13809
.. date: 7292
.. nonce: zwqMZw
.. section: Library

Fix regression where bz2 module wouldn't work when threads are disabled.
Original patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 13589
.. date: 7291
.. nonce: sQsnEf
.. section: Library

Fix some serialization primitives in the aifc module. Patch by Oleg
Plakhotnyuk.

..

.. bpo: 13642
.. date: 7290
.. nonce: 4YVaQS
.. section: Library

Unquote before b64encoding user:password during Basic Authentication. Patch
contributed by Joonas Kuorilehto.

..

.. bpo: 12364
.. date: 7289
.. nonce: OnVual
.. section: Library

Fix a hang in concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor. The hang would occur
when retrieving the result of a scheduled future after the executor had been
shut down.

..

.. bpo: 13502
.. date: 7288
.. nonce: Dn8qtt
.. section: Library

threading: Fix a race condition in Event.wait() that made it return False
when the event was set and cleared right after.

..

.. bpo: 9993
.. date: 7287
.. nonce: _cXvpp
.. section: Library

When the source and destination are on different filesystems, and the source
is a symlink, shutil.move() now recreates a symlink on the destination
instead of copying the file contents.  Patch by Jonathan Niehof and Hynek
Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 12926
.. date: 7286
.. nonce: MSqOB2
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in tarfile's link extraction.

..

.. bpo: 13696
.. date: 7285
.. nonce: bBu5Fk
.. section: Library

Fix the 302 Relative URL Redirection problem.

..

.. bpo: 13636
.. date: 7284
.. nonce: eWRf1t
.. section: Library

Weak ciphers are now disabled by default in the ssl module (except when
SSLv2 is explicitly asked for).

..

.. bpo: 12715
.. date: 7283
.. nonce: RqYLXI
.. section: Library

Add an optional symlinks argument to shutil functions (copyfile, copymode,
copystat, copy, copy2).  When that parameter is true, symlinks aren't
dereferenced and the operation instead acts on the symlink itself (or
creates one, if relevant).  Patch by Hynek Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7282
.. nonce: gYE9q-
.. section: Library

Add a flags parameter to select.epoll.

..

.. bpo: 13626
.. date: 7281
.. nonce: we7C_R
.. section: Library

Add support for SSL Diffie-Hellman key exchange, through the
SSLContext.load_dh_params() method and the ssl.OP_SINGLE_DH_USE option.

..

.. bpo: 11006
.. date: 7280
.. nonce: 6KuDUa
.. section: Library

Don't issue low level warning in subprocess when pipe2() fails.

..

.. bpo: 13620
.. date: 7279
.. nonce: os2NdM
.. section: Library

Support for Chrome browser in webbrowser.  Patch contributed by Arnaud
Calmettes.

..

.. bpo: 11829
.. date: 7278
.. nonce: vH6FxA
.. section: Library

Fix code execution holes in inspect.getattr_static for metaclasses with
metaclasses. Patch by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 12708
.. date: 7277
.. nonce: AarraR
.. section: Library

Add starmap() and starmap_async() methods (similar to itertools.starmap())
to multiprocessing.Pool.  Patch by Hynek Schlawack.

..

.. bpo: 1785
.. date: 7276
.. nonce: DKL5I8
.. section: Library

Fix inspect and pydoc with misbehaving descriptors.

..

.. bpo: 13637
.. date: 7275
.. nonce: 3C-33m
.. section: Library

"a2b" functions in the binascii module now accept ASCII-only unicode
strings.

..

.. bpo: 13634
.. date: 7274
.. nonce: dBF4qW
.. section: Library

Add support for querying and disabling SSL compression.

..

.. bpo: 13627
.. date: 7273
.. nonce: Lk4xYf
.. section: Library

Add support for SSL Elliptic Curve-based Diffie-Hellman key exchange,
through the SSLContext.set_ecdh_curve() method and the
ssl.OP_SINGLE_ECDH_USE option.

..

.. bpo: 13635
.. date: 7272
.. nonce: j9OeLf
.. section: Library

Add ssl.OP_CIPHER_SERVER_PREFERENCE, so that SSL servers choose the cipher
based on their own preferences, rather than on the client's.

..

.. bpo: 11813
.. date: 7271
.. nonce: _NBHv5
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getattr_static for modules. Patch by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 7502
.. date: 7270
.. nonce: lIMyju
.. section: Library

Fix equality comparison for DocTestCase instances.  Patch by Cédric Krier.

..

.. bpo: 11870
.. date: 7269
.. nonce: 85bAB9
.. section: Library

threading: Properly reinitialize threads internal locks and condition
variables to avoid deadlocks in child processes.

..

.. bpo: 8035
.. date: 7268
.. nonce: yzn_Oa
.. section: Library

urllib: Fix a bug where the client could remain stuck after a redirection or
an error.

..

.. bpo: 13560
.. date: 7267
.. nonce: ZOg9KG
.. section: Library

os.strerror() now uses the current locale encoding instead of UTF-8.

..

.. bpo: 8373
.. date: 7266
.. nonce: F6lhZW
.. section: Library

The filesystem path of AF_UNIX sockets now uses the filesystem encoding and
the surrogateescape error handler, rather than UTF-8.  Patch by David
Watson.

..

.. bpo: 10350
.. date: 7265
.. nonce: GIPImg
.. section: Library

Read and save errno before calling a function which might overwrite it.
Original patch by Hallvard B Furuseth.

..

.. bpo: 11610
.. date: 7264
.. nonce: 3IqDr5
.. section: Library

Introduce a more general way to declare abstract properties.

..

.. bpo: 13591
.. date: 7263
.. nonce: QeA9GX
.. section: Library

A bug in importlib has been fixed that caused import_module to load a module
twice.

..

.. bpo: 13449
.. date: 7262
.. nonce: Iuwk5B
.. section: Library

sched.scheduler.run() method has a new "blocking" parameter which when set
to False makes run() execute the scheduled events due to expire soonest (if
any) and then return.  Patch by Giampaolo Rodolà.

..

.. bpo: 8684
.. date: 7261
.. nonce: 1mOWHH
.. section: Library

sched.scheduler class can be safely used in multi-threaded environments.
Patch by Josiah Carlson and Giampaolo Rodolà.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7260
.. nonce: DjTC3I
.. section: Library

Alias resource.error to OSError ala PEP 3151.

..

.. bpo: 5689
.. date: 7259
.. nonce: CDjEGM
.. section: Library

Add support for lzma compression to the tarfile module.

..

.. bpo: 13248
.. date: 7258
.. nonce: kTLQyB
.. section: Library

Turn 3.2's PendingDeprecationWarning into 3.3's DeprecationWarning.  It
covers 'cgi.escape', 'importlib.abc.PyLoader', 'importlib.abc.PyPycLoader',
'nntplib.NNTP.xgtitle', 'nntplib.NNTP.xpath', and private attributes of
'smtpd.SMTPChannel'.

..

.. bpo: 5905
.. date: 7257
.. nonce: fKvZt3
.. section: Library

time.strftime() is now using the current locale encoding, instead of UTF-8,
if the wcsftime() function is not available. (See also: bpo-13560)

..

.. bpo: 13464
.. date: 7256
.. nonce: RVb-lP
.. section: Library

Add a readinto() method to http.client.HTTPResponse.  Patch by Jon Kuhn.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7255
.. nonce: xZO873
.. section: Library

tarfile.py: Correctly detect bzip2 compressed streams with blocksizes other
than 900k.

..

.. bpo: 13439
.. date: 7254
.. nonce: H8wdOt
.. section: Library

Fix many errors in turtle docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 6715
.. date: 7253
.. nonce: _I5wbV
.. section: Library

Add a module 'lzma' for compression using the LZMA algorithm. Thanks to Per
Øyvind Karlsen for the initial implementation.

..

.. bpo: 13487
.. date: 7252
.. nonce: tnCtZi
.. section: Library

Make inspect.getmodule robust against changes done to sys.modules while it
is iterating over it.

..

.. bpo: 12618
.. date: 7251
.. nonce: 4vfViQ
.. section: Library

Fix a bug that prevented py_compile from creating byte compiled files in the
current directory.  Initial patch by Sjoerd de Vries.

..

.. bpo: 13444
.. date: 7250
.. nonce: 05tB38
.. section: Library

When stdout has been closed explicitly, we should not attempt to flush it at
shutdown and print an error.

..

.. bpo: 12567
.. date: 7249
.. nonce: UNWMcq
.. section: Library

The curses module uses Unicode functions for Unicode arguments when it is
linked to the ncurses library. It encodes also Unicode strings to the locale
encoding instead of UTF-8.

..

.. bpo: 12856
.. date: 7248
.. nonce: 7eIfN8
.. section: Library

Ensure child processes do not inherit the parent's random seed for filename
generation in the tempfile module.  Patch by Brian Harring.

..

.. bpo: 9957
.. date: 7247
.. nonce: wDigEk
.. section: Library

SpooledTemporaryFile.truncate() now accepts an optional size parameter, as
other file-like objects.  Patch by Ryan Kelly.

..

.. bpo: 13458
.. date: 7246
.. nonce: EHyzED
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in the ssl module when decoding a certificate with a
subjectAltName.  Patch by Robert Xiao.

..

.. bpo: 13415
.. date: 7245
.. nonce: Ap8joO
.. section: Library

os.unsetenv() doesn't ignore errors anymore.

..

.. bpo: 13245
.. date: 7244
.. nonce: FxSKtK
.. section: Library

sched.scheduler class constructor's timefunc and delayfunct parameters are
now optional. scheduler.enter and scheduler.enterabs methods gained a new
kwargs parameter. Patch contributed by Chris Clark.

..

.. bpo: 12328
.. date: 7243
.. nonce: z7LwM4
.. section: Library

Under Windows, refactor handling of Ctrl-C events and make
_multiprocessing.win32.WaitForMultipleObjects interruptible when the
wait_flag parameter is false.  Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 13322
.. date: 7242
.. nonce: Ect89q
.. section: Library

Fix BufferedWriter.write() to ensure that BlockingIOError is raised when the
wrapped raw file is non-blocking and the write would block. Previous code
assumed that the raw write() would raise BlockingIOError, but
RawIOBase.write() is defined to returned None when the call would block.
Patch by sbt.

..

.. bpo: 13358
.. date: 7241
.. nonce: kPO1ja
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now calls handle_data only once for each CDATA.

..

.. bpo: 4147
.. date: 7240
.. nonce: wQbNcw
.. section: Library

minidom's toprettyxml no longer adds whitespace around a text node when it
is the only child of an element.  Initial patch by Dan Kenigsberg.

..

.. bpo: 13374
.. date: 7239
.. nonce: A6PdRD
.. section: Library

The Windows bytes API has been deprecated in the os module. Use Unicode
filenames instead of bytes filenames to not depend on the ANSI code page
anymore and to support any filename.

..

.. bpo: 13297
.. date: 7238
.. nonce: uo2s_p
.. section: Library

Use bytes type to send and receive binary data through XMLRPC.

..

.. bpo: 6397
.. date: 7237
.. nonce: gywYD-
.. section: Library

Support "/dev/poll" polling objects in select module, under Solaris &
derivatives.

..

.. bpo: 1745761
.. date: 7236
.. nonce: zfO1ng
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now correctly handles non-valid attributes, including adjacent
and unquoted attributes. (See also: bpo-755670, bpo-13357, bpo-12629,
bpo-1200313)

..

.. bpo: 13193
.. date: 7235
.. nonce: fxIZuD
.. section: Library

Fix distutils.filelist.FileList and packaging.manifest.Manifest under
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 13384
.. date: 7234
.. nonce: wx_SPZ
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary __future__ import in Lib/random.py

..

.. bpo: 13149
.. date: 7233
.. nonce: wy6pt7
.. section: Library

Speed up append-only StringIO objects.

..

.. bpo: 13373
.. date: 7232
.. nonce: 8wM3bP
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.Queue.get() could sometimes block indefinitely when called
with a timeout.  Patch by Arnaud Ysmal.

..

.. bpo: 13254
.. date: 7231
.. nonce: CKJxT0
.. section: Library

Fix Maildir initialization so that maildir contents are read correctly.

..

.. bpo: 3067
.. date: 7230
.. nonce: IpKDf8
.. section: Library

locale.setlocale() now raises TypeError if the second argument is an invalid
iterable. Its documentation and docstring were also updated. Initial patch
by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 13140
.. date: 7229
.. nonce: EguPSD
.. section: Library

Fix the daemon_threads attribute of ThreadingMixIn.

..

.. bpo: 13339
.. date: 7228
.. nonce: 3ty5ip
.. section: Library

Fix compile error in posixmodule.c due to missing semicolon. Thanks to
Robert Xiao.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7227
.. nonce: QSo5ij
.. section: Library

Byte compilation in packaging is now isolated from the calling Python -B or
-O options, instead of being disallowed under -B or buggy under -O.

..

.. bpo: 10570
.. date: 7226
.. nonce: jvnBd5
.. section: Library

curses.putp() and curses.tparm() are now expecting a byte string, instead of
a Unicode string.

..

.. bpo: 13295
.. date: 7225
.. nonce: wTSBvE
.. section: Library

http.server now produces valid HTML 4.01 strict.

..

.. bpo: 2892
.. date: 7224
.. nonce: kugtRq
.. section: Library

preserve iterparse events in case of SyntaxError.

..

.. bpo: 13287
.. date: 7223
.. nonce: eSYlD8
.. section: Library

urllib.request and urllib.error now contains an __all__ attribute to expose
only relevant classes and functions.  Patch by Florent Xicluna.

..

.. bpo: 670664
.. date: 7222
.. nonce: dPMzKt
.. section: Library

Fix HTMLParser to correctly handle the content of ``<script>...</script>``
and ``<style>...</style>``.

..

.. bpo: 10817
.. date: 7221
.. nonce: 2NZ4yV
.. section: Library

Fix urlretrieve function to raise ContentTooShortError even when reporthook
is None. Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7220
.. nonce: 9QMqzu
.. section: Library

Fix the xmlrpc.client user agent to return something similar to
urllib.request user agent: "Python-xmlrpc/3.3".

..

.. bpo: 13293
.. date: 7219
.. nonce: I4NsfN
.. section: Library

Better error message when trying to marshal bytes using xmlrpc.client.

..

.. bpo: 13291
.. date: 7218
.. nonce: kr_eYK
.. section: Library

NameError in xmlrpc package.

..

.. bpo: 13258
.. date: 7217
.. nonce: PqfnGc
.. section: Library

Use callable() built-in in the standard library.

..

.. bpo: 13273
.. date: 7216
.. nonce: QnsJc6
.. section: Library

fix a bug that prevented HTMLParser to properly detect some tags when
strict=False.

..

.. bpo: 11183
.. date: 7215
.. nonce: yoGopX
.. section: Library

Add finer-grained exceptions to the ssl module, so that you don't have to
inspect the exception's attributes in the common case.

..

.. bpo: 13216
.. date: 7214
.. nonce: idAP8q
.. section: Library

Add cp65001 codec, the Windows UTF-8 (CP_UTF8).

..

.. bpo: 13226
.. date: 7213
.. nonce: zi3BMF
.. section: Library

Add RTLD_xxx constants to the os module. These constants can be used with
sys.setdlopenflags().

..

.. bpo: 10278
.. date: 7212
.. nonce: mnE2RY
.. section: Library

Add clock_getres(), clock_gettime() and CLOCK_xxx constants to the time
module. time.clock_gettime(time.CLOCK_MONOTONIC) provides a monotonic clock

..

.. bpo: 10332
.. date: 7211
.. nonce: E9qFmi
.. section: Library

multiprocessing: fix a race condition when a Pool is closed before all tasks
have completed.

..

.. bpo: 13255
.. date: 7210
.. nonce: UiGxn5
.. section: Library

wrong docstrings in array module.

..

.. bpo: 8540
.. date: 7209
.. nonce: dyhmYO
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated Context._clamp attribute in Decimal module.

..

.. bpo: 13235
.. date: 7208
.. nonce: AEP8bq
.. section: Library

Added DeprecationWarning to logging.warn() method and function.

..

.. bpo: 9168
.. date: 7207
.. nonce: eLGWkL
.. section: Library

now smtpd is able to bind privileged port.

..

.. bpo: 12529
.. date: 7206
.. nonce: TX2NNI
.. section: Library

fix cgi.parse_header issue on strings with double-quotes and semicolons
together. Patch by Ben Darnell and Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 13227
.. date: 7205
.. nonce: CQKvc0
.. section: Library

functools.lru_cache() now has a option to distinguish calls with different
argument types.

..

.. bpo: 6090
.. date: 7204
.. nonce: 8BVasJ
.. section: Library

zipfile raises a ValueError when a document with a timestamp earlier than
1980 is provided. Patch contributed by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 13150
.. date: 7203
.. nonce: ugPhZN
.. section: Library

sysconfig no longer parses the Makefile and config.h files when imported,
instead doing it at build time.  This makes importing sysconfig faster and
reduces Python startup time by 20%.

..

.. bpo: 12448
.. date: 7202
.. nonce: KYsQbN
.. section: Library

smtplib now flushes stdout while running ``python -m smtplib`` in order to
display the prompt correctly.

..

.. bpo: 12454
.. date: 7201
.. nonce: 9rCEZL
.. section: Library

The mailbox module is now using ASCII, instead of the locale encoding, to
read and write .mh_sequences files.

..

.. bpo: 13194
.. date: 7200
.. nonce: b0HQpu
.. section: Library

zlib.compressobj().copy() and zlib.decompressobj().copy() are now available
on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 1673007
.. date: 7199
.. nonce: 0MQxW5
.. section: Library

urllib.request now supports HEAD request via new method argument. Patch
contributions by David Stanek, Patrick Westerhoff and Ezio Melotti.

..

.. bpo: 12386
.. date: 7198
.. nonce: -p2Mdp
.. section: Library

packaging does not fail anymore when writing the RESOURCES file.

..

.. bpo: 13158
.. date: 7197
.. nonce: q5jmKD
.. section: Library

Fix decoding and encoding of GNU tar specific base-256 number fields in
tarfile.

..

.. bpo: 13025
.. date: 7196
.. nonce: T2J6Cv
.. section: Library

mimetypes is now reading MIME types using the UTF-8 encoding, instead of the
locale encoding.

..

.. bpo: 10653
.. date: 7195
.. nonce: jvmIA9
.. section: Library

On Windows, use strftime() instead of wcsftime() because wcsftime() doesn't
format time zone correctly.

..

.. bpo: 13150
.. date: 7194
.. nonce: ImOpvU
.. section: Library

The tokenize module doesn't compile large regular expressions at startup
anymore.

..

.. bpo: 11171
.. date: 7193
.. nonce: blc9OU
.. section: Library

Fix distutils.sysconfig.get_makefile_filename when Python was configured
with different prefix and exec-prefix.

..

.. bpo: 11254
.. date: 7192
.. nonce: Ljgs_Y
.. section: Library

Teach distutils and packaging to compile .pyc and .pyo files in PEP
3147-compliant __pycache__ directories.

..

.. bpo: 7367
.. date: 7191
.. nonce: 2xoC41
.. section: Library

Fix pkgutil.walk_paths to skip directories whose contents cannot be read.

..

.. bpo: 3163
.. date: 7190
.. nonce: FrkEgb
.. section: Library

The struct module gets new format characters 'n' and 'N' supporting C
integer types ``ssize_t`` and ``size_t``, respectively.

..

.. bpo: 13099
.. date: 7189
.. nonce: hhmbgp
.. section: Library

Fix sqlite3.Cursor.lastrowid under a Turkish locale. Reported and diagnosed
by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 13087
.. date: 7188
.. nonce: puG2k1
.. section: Library

BufferedReader.seek() now always raises UnsupportedOperation if the
underlying raw stream is unseekable, even if the seek could be satisfied
using the internal buffer.  Patch by John O'Connor.

..

.. bpo: 7689
.. date: 7187
.. nonce: oLubls
.. section: Library

Allow pickling of dynamically created classes when their metaclass is
registered with copyreg.  Patch by Nicolas M. Thiéry and Craig Citro.

..

.. bpo: 13034
.. date: 7186
.. nonce: 6wbYBd
.. section: Library

When decoding some SSL certificates, the subjectAltName extension could be
unreported.

..

.. bpo: 12306
.. date: 7185
.. nonce: aywr5r
.. section: Library

Expose the runtime version of the zlib C library as a constant,
ZLIB_RUNTIME_VERSION, in the zlib module. Patch by Torsten Landschoff.

..

.. bpo: 12959
.. date: 7184
.. nonce: kHI1HM
.. section: Library

Add collections.ChainMap to collections.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 8933
.. date: 7183
.. nonce: zlAZwE
.. section: Library

distutils' PKG-INFO files and packaging's METADATA files will now correctly
report Metadata-Version: 1.1 instead of 1.0 if a Classifier or Download-URL
field is present.

..

.. bpo: 12567
.. date: 7182
.. nonce: rAfZbK
.. section: Library

Add curses.unget_wch() function. Push a character so the next get_wch() will
return it.

..

.. bpo: 9561
.. date: 7181
.. nonce: l9A1VJ
.. section: Library

distutils and packaging now writes egg-info files using UTF-8, instead of
the locale encoding.

..

.. bpo: 8286
.. date: 7180
.. nonce: 9gJAZN
.. section: Library

The distutils command sdist will print a warning message instead of crashing
when an invalid path is given in the manifest template.

..

.. bpo: 12841
.. date: 7179
.. nonce: VRTnfy
.. section: Library

tarfile unnecessarily checked the existence of numerical user and group ids
on extraction. If one of them did not exist the respective id of the current
user (i.e. root) was used for the file and ownership information was lost.

..

.. bpo: 12888
.. date: 7178
.. nonce: P2pxQ6
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in HTMLParser.unescape that prevented it to escape more than 128
entities.  Patch by Peter Otten.

..

.. bpo: 12878
.. date: 7177
.. nonce: 3vxEcY
.. section: Library

Expose a __dict__ attribute on io.IOBase and its subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 12494
.. date: 7176
.. nonce: Tk-YKz
.. section: Library

On error, call(), check_call(), check_output() and getstatusoutput()
functions of the subprocess module now kill the process, read its status (to
avoid zombis) and close pipes.

..

.. bpo: 12720
.. date: 7175
.. nonce: lPMNRD
.. section: Library

Expose low-level Linux extended file attribute functions in os.

..

.. bpo: 10946
.. date: 7174
.. nonce: c8rjV6
.. section: Library

The distutils commands bdist_dumb, bdist_wininst and bdist_msi now respect a
--skip-build option given to bdist.  The packaging commands were fixed too.

..

.. bpo: 12847
.. date: 7173
.. nonce: neDezj
.. section: Library

Fix a crash with negative PUT and LONG_BINPUT arguments in the C pickle
implementation.

..

.. bpo: 11564
.. date: 7172
.. nonce: s8vjkM
.. section: Library

Avoid crashes when trying to pickle huge objects or containers (more than
2**31 items).  Instead, in most cases, an OverflowError is raised.

..

.. bpo: 12287
.. date: 7171
.. nonce: _b1Hy3
.. section: Library

Fix a stack corruption in ossaudiodev module when the FD is greater than
FD_SETSIZE.

..

.. bpo: 12839
.. date: 7170
.. nonce: YFQywe
.. section: Library

Fix crash in zlib module due to version mismatch. Fix by Richard M. Tew.

..

.. bpo: 9923
.. date: 7169
.. nonce: ah6F7t
.. section: Library

The mailcap module now correctly uses the platform path separator for the
MAILCAP environment variable on non-POSIX platforms.

..

.. bpo: 12835
.. date: 7168
.. nonce: ieA6Kw
.. section: Library

Follow up to #6560 that unconditionally prevents use of the unencrypted
sendmsg/recvmsg APIs on SSL wrapped sockets. Patch by David Watson.

..

.. bpo: 12803
.. date: 7167
.. nonce: 9tH8wT
.. section: Library

SSLContext.load_cert_chain() now accepts a password argument to be used if
the private key is encrypted.  Patch by Adam Simpkins.

..

.. bpo: 11657
.. date: 7166
.. nonce: K6NkKs
.. section: Library

Fix sending file descriptors over 255 over a multiprocessing Pipe.

..

.. bpo: 12811
.. date: 7165
.. nonce: ij5oOH
.. section: Library

tabnanny.check() now promptly closes checked files. Patch by Anthony Briggs.

..

.. bpo: 6560
.. date: 7164
.. nonce: E-5r4K
.. section: Library

The sendmsg/recvmsg API is now exposed by the socket module when provided by
the underlying platform, supporting processing of ancillary data in pure
Python code. Patch by David Watson and Heiko Wundram.

..

.. bpo: 12326
.. date: 7163
.. nonce: _EUw4i
.. section: Library

On Linux, sys.platform doesn't contain the major version anymore. It is now
always 'linux', instead of 'linux2' or 'linux3' depending on the Linux
version used to build Python.

..

.. bpo: 12213
.. date: 7162
.. nonce: uu17mW
.. section: Library

Fix a buffering bug with interleaved reads and writes that could appear on
BufferedRandom streams.

..

.. bpo: 12778
.. date: 7161
.. nonce: p_dap7
.. section: Library

Reduce memory consumption when JSON-encoding a large container of many small
objects.

..

.. bpo: 12650
.. date: 7160
.. nonce: hY2GLb
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition where a subprocess.Popen could leak resources
(FD/zombie) when killed at the wrong time.

..

.. bpo: 12744
.. date: 7159
.. nonce: gW4Lzk
.. section: Library

Fix inefficient representation of integers between 2**31 and 2**63 on
systems with a 64-bit C "long".

..

.. bpo: 12646
.. date: 7158
.. nonce: y_M9T8
.. section: Library

Add an 'eof' attribute to zlib.Decompress, to make it easier to detect
truncated input streams.

..

.. bpo: 11513
.. date: 7157
.. nonce: BCtVVS
.. section: Library

Fix exception handling ``tarfile.TarFile.gzopen()`` when the file cannot be
opened.

..

.. bpo: 12687
.. date: 7156
.. nonce: vxSpbl
.. section: Library

Fix a possible buffering bug when unpickling text mode (protocol 0, mostly)
pickles.

..

.. bpo: 10087
.. date: 7155
.. nonce: JozXk_
.. section: Library

Fix the html output format of the calendar module.

..

.. bpo: 13121
.. date: 7154
.. nonce: Wbo0Z9
.. section: Library

add support for inplace math operators to collections.Counter.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7153
.. nonce: oX3u5E
.. section: Library

Add support for unary plus and unary minus to collections.Counter.

..

.. bpo: 12683
.. date: 7152
.. nonce: pySdFM
.. section: Library

urlparse updated to include svn as schemes that uses relative paths. (svn
from 1.5 onwards support relative path).

..

.. bpo: 12655
.. date: 7151
.. nonce: 5Ir5JO
.. section: Library

Expose functions from sched.h in the os module: sched_yield(),
sched_setscheduler(), sched_getscheduler(), sched_setparam(),
sched_get_min_priority(), sched_get_max_priority(), sched_rr_get_interval(),
sched_getaffinity(), sched_setaffinity().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7150
.. nonce: Bipjct
.. section: Library

Add ThreadError to threading.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 11104
.. date: 7149
.. nonce: EZRzAK
.. section: Library

Fix the behavior of distutils' sdist command with manually-maintained
MANIFEST files. (See also: bpo-8688)

..

.. bpo: 11281
.. date: 7148
.. nonce: dxj7Ic
.. section: Library

smtplib.STMP gets source_address parameter, which adds the ability to bind
to specific source address on a machine with multiple interfaces. Patch by
Paulo Scardine.

..

.. bpo: 12464
.. date: 7147
.. nonce: MOtl8D
.. section: Library

tempfile.TemporaryDirectory.cleanup() should not follow symlinks: fix it.
Patch by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 8887
.. date: 7146
.. nonce: GV2FAG
.. section: Library

"pydoc somebuiltin.somemethod" (or help('somebuiltin.somemethod') in Python
code) now finds the doc of the method.

..

.. bpo: 10968
.. date: 7145
.. nonce: UjmUwW
.. section: Library

Remove indirection in threading.  The public names (Event, Condition, etc.)
used to be factory functions returning instances of hidden classes (_Event,
_Condition, etc.), because (if Guido recalls correctly) this code pre-dates
the ability to subclass extension types.  It is now possible to inherit from
these classes, without having to import the private underscored names like
multiprocessing did.

..

.. bpo: 9723
.. date: 7144
.. nonce: Eoxq0n
.. section: Library

Add shlex.quote functions, to escape filenames and command lines.

..

.. bpo: 12603
.. date: 7143
.. nonce: wO8DQ8
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() on files with non-negative st_mtime.

..

.. bpo: 12514
.. date: 7142
.. nonce: e1PR4a
.. section: Library

Use try/finally to assure the timeit module restores garbage collections
when it is done.

..

.. bpo: 12607
.. date: 7141
.. nonce: t5RWHt
.. section: Library

In subprocess, fix issue where if stdin, stdout or stderr is given as a low
fd, it gets overwritten.

..

.. bpo: 12576
.. date: 7140
.. nonce: WqmGwQ
.. section: Library

Fix urlopen behavior on sites which do not send (or obfuscates)
``Connection: close`` header.

..

.. bpo: 12560
.. date: 7139
.. nonce: 9ydkW_
.. section: Library

Build libpython.so on OpenBSD. Patch by Stefan Sperling.

..

.. bpo: 1813
.. date: 7138
.. nonce: YEClj8
.. section: Library

Fix codec lookup under Turkish locales.

..

.. bpo: 12591
.. date: 7137
.. nonce: 6smMLs
.. section: Library

Improve support of "universal newlines" in the subprocess module: the piped
streams can now be properly read from or written to.

..

.. bpo: 12591
.. date: 7136
.. nonce: ETdSWV
.. section: Library

Allow io.TextIOWrapper to work with raw IO objects (without a read1()
method), and add a *write_through* parameter to mandate unbuffered writes.

..

.. bpo: 10883
.. date: 7135
.. nonce: EkDmNb
.. section: Library

Fix socket leaks in urllib.request when using FTP.

..

.. bpo: 12592
.. date: 7134
.. nonce: -EZrk3
.. section: Library

Make Python build on OpenBSD 5 (and future major releases).

..

.. bpo: 12372
.. date: 7133
.. nonce: 7QRSzO
.. section: Library

POSIX semaphores are broken on AIX: don't use them.

..

.. bpo: 12551
.. date: 7132
.. nonce: qzV6gf
.. section: Library

Provide a get_channel_binding() method on SSL sockets so as to get channel
binding data for the current SSL session (only the "tls-unique" channel
binding is implemented).  This allows the implementation of certain
authentication mechanisms such as SCRAM-SHA-1-PLUS.  Patch by Jacek
Konieczny.

..

.. bpo: 665194
.. date: 7131
.. nonce: D_Nif1
.. section: Library

email.utils now has format_datetime and parsedate_to_datetime functions,
allowing for round tripping of RFC2822 format dates.

..

.. bpo: 12571
.. date: 7130
.. nonce: qrkjgh
.. section: Library

Add a plat-linux3 directory mirroring the plat-linux2 directory, so that
"import DLFCN" and other similar imports work on Linux 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 7484
.. date: 7129
.. nonce: 0bZoAH
.. section: Library

smtplib no longer puts <> around addresses in VRFY and EXPN commands; they
aren't required and in fact postfix doesn't support that form.

..

.. bpo: 12273
.. date: 7128
.. nonce: 8-Rcvi
.. section: Library

Remove ast.__version__. AST changes can be accounted for by checking
sys.version_info or sys._mercurial.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7127
.. nonce: nBJcjf
.. section: Library

Silence spurious "broken pipe" tracebacks when shutting down a
ProcessPoolExecutor.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7126
.. nonce: IaRSlM
.. section: Library

Fix potential resource leaks in concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor by
joining all queues and processes when shutdown() is called.

..

.. bpo: 11603
.. date: 7125
.. nonce: B016rQ
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when __str__ is rebound as __repr__.  Patch by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 11321
.. date: 7124
.. nonce: rsmpgY
.. section: Library

Fix a crash with multiple imports of the _pickle module when embedding
Python.  Patch by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 6755
.. date: 7123
.. nonce: vkDHPt
.. section: Library

Add get_wch() method to curses.window class. Patch by Iñigo Serna.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7122
.. nonce: JDQ86j
.. section: Library

Add cgi.closelog() function to close the log file.

..

.. bpo: 12502
.. date: 7121
.. nonce: p8Kedr
.. section: Library

asyncore: fix polling loop with AF_UNIX sockets.

..

.. bpo: 4376
.. date: 7120
.. nonce: 4S-uUv
.. section: Library

ctypes now supports nested structures in a endian different than the parent
structure. Patch by Vlad Riscutia.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7119
.. nonce: IFeQ4p
.. section: Library

Raise ValueError when attempting to set the _CHUNK_SIZE attribute of a
TextIOWrapper to a huge value, not TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 12504
.. date: 7118
.. nonce: DE9Ipi
.. section: Library

Close file handles in a timely manner in packaging.database. This fixes a
bug with the remove (uninstall) feature on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 12169
.. date: 7117
.. nonce: AgXMPs
.. section: Library

Factor out code used by various packaging commands to make HTTP POST
requests, and make sure it uses CRLF. (See also: bpo-10510)

..

.. bpo: 12016
.. date: 7116
.. nonce: HJDsZ9
.. section: Library

Multibyte CJK decoders now resynchronize faster. They only ignore the first
byte of an invalid byte sequence. For example, b'\xff\n'.decode('gb2312',
'replace') gives '\ufffd\n' instead of '\ufffd'.

..

.. bpo: 12459
.. date: 7115
.. nonce: -fijQQ
.. section: Library

time.sleep() now raises a ValueError if the sleep length is negative,
instead of an infinite sleep on Windows or raising an IOError on Linux for
example, to have the same behaviour on all platforms.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7114
.. nonce: rQ7kKi
.. section: Library

pydoc: html_getfile() now uses tokenize.open() to support Python scripts
using a encoding different than UTF-8 (read the coding cookie of the
script).

..

.. bpo: 12493
.. date: 7113
.. nonce: qaPq_Q
.. section: Library

subprocess: Popen.communicate() now also handles EINTR errors if the process
has only one pipe.

..

.. bpo: 12467
.. date: 7112
.. nonce: x0sMKt
.. section: Library

warnings: fix a race condition if a warning is emitted at shutdown, if
globals()['__file__'] is None.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7111
.. nonce: n8asmW
.. section: Library

pydoc: importfile() now opens the Python script in binary mode, instead of
text mode using the locale encoding, to avoid encoding issues.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7110
.. nonce: 3i1f6-
.. section: Library

runpy: run_path() now opens the Python script in binary mode, instead of
text mode using the locale encoding, to support other encodings than UTF-8
(scripts using the coding cookie).

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7109
.. nonce: yZnhXf
.. section: Library

xml.dom.pulldom: parse() now opens files in binary mode instead of the text
mode (using the locale encoding) to avoid encoding issues.

..

.. bpo: 12147
.. date: 7108
.. nonce: iUO_PI
.. section: Library

Adjust the new-in-3.2 smtplib.send_message method for better conformance to
the RFCs: correctly handle Sender and Resent- headers.

..

.. bpo: 12352
.. date: 7107
.. nonce: Htm8Oe
.. section: Library

Fix a deadlock in multiprocessing.Heap when a block is freed by the garbage
collector while the Heap lock is held.

..

.. bpo: 12462
.. date: 7106
.. nonce: DxQNvN
.. section: Library

time.sleep() now immediately calls the (Python) signal handler if it is
interrupted by a signal, instead of having to wait until the next
instruction.

..

.. bpo: 12442
.. date: 7105
.. nonce: NNAjnA
.. section: Library

new shutil.disk_usage function, providing total, used and free disk space
statistics.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7104
.. nonce: HCFo86
.. section: Library

The XInclude default loader of xml.etree now decodes files from UTF-8
instead of the locale encoding if the encoding is not specified. It now also
opens XML files for the parser in binary mode instead of the text mode to
avoid encoding issues.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7103
.. nonce: lSrEUK
.. section: Library

doctest.debug_script() doesn't create a temporary file anymore to avoid
encoding issues.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7102
.. nonce: AOrBIY
.. section: Library

pydoc.synopsis() now reads the encoding cookie if available, to read the
Python script from the right encoding.

..

.. bpo: 12451
.. date: 7101
.. nonce: 7d0tCg
.. section: Library

distutils now opens the setup script in binary mode to read the encoding
cookie, instead of opening it in UTF-8.

..

.. bpo: 9516
.. date: 7100
.. nonce: QDNUKB
.. section: Library

On Mac OS X, change Distutils to no longer globally attempt to check or set
the MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET environment variable for the interpreter
process.  This could cause failures in non-Distutils subprocesses and was
unreliable since tests or user programs could modify the interpreter
environment after Distutils set it.  Instead, have Distutils set the
deployment target only in the environment of each build subprocess.  It is
still possible to globally override the default by setting
MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET before launching the interpreter; its value must be
greater or equal to the default value, the value with which the interpreter
was built.  Also, implement the same handling in packaging.

..

.. bpo: 12422
.. date: 7099
.. nonce: F1zSw9
.. section: Library

In the copy module, don't store objects that are their own copy in the memo
dict.

..

.. bpo: 12303
.. date: 7098
.. nonce: wblNCh
.. section: Library

Add sigwaitinfo() and sigtimedwait() to the signal module.

..

.. bpo: 12404
.. date: 7097
.. nonce: bS5-Qf
.. section: Library

Remove C89 incompatible code from mmap module. Patch by Akira Kitada.

..

.. bpo: 1874
.. date: 7096
.. nonce: InySSQ
.. section: Library

email now detects and reports as a defect the presence of any CTE other than
7bit, 8bit, or binary on a multipart.

..

.. bpo: 12383
.. date: 7095
.. nonce: 5vTBCn
.. section: Library

Fix subprocess module with env={}: don't copy the environment variables,
start with an empty environment.

..

.. bpo: 11637
.. date: 7094
.. nonce: 0xbsOd
.. section: Library

Fix support for importing packaging setup hooks from the project directory.

..

.. bpo: 6771
.. date: 7093
.. nonce: nKVoI9
.. section: Library

Moved the curses.wrapper function from the single-function wrapper module
into __init__, eliminating the module.  Since __init__ was already importing
the function to curses.wrapper, there is no API change.

..

.. bpo: 11584
.. date: 7092
.. nonce: pP115T
.. section: Library

email.header.decode_header no longer fails if the header passed to it is a
Header object, and Header/make_header no longer fail if given binary
unknown-8bit input.

..

.. bpo: 11700
.. date: 7091
.. nonce: 2CdbDP
.. section: Library

mailbox proxy object close methods can now be called multiple times without
error.

..

.. bpo: 11767
.. date: 7090
.. nonce: EKah2p
.. section: Library

Correct file descriptor leak in mailbox's __getitem__ method.

..

.. bpo: 12133
.. date: 7089
.. nonce: Ag9yty
.. section: Library

AbstractHTTPHandler.do_open() of urllib.request closes the HTTP connection
if its getresponse() method fails with a socket error. Patch written by Ezio
Melotti.

..

.. bpo: 12240
.. date: 7088
.. nonce: jttNO6
.. section: Library

Allow multiple setup hooks in packaging's setup.cfg files. Original patch by
Erik Bray.

..

.. bpo: 9284
.. date: 7087
.. nonce: -NhBcF
.. section: Library

Allow inspect.findsource() to find the source of doctest functions.

..

.. bpo: 11595
.. date: 7086
.. nonce: NQkt35
.. section: Library

Fix assorted bugs in packaging.util.cfg_to_args, a compatibility helper for
the distutils-packaging transition.  Original patch by Erik Bray.

..

.. bpo: 12287
.. date: 7085
.. nonce: PxhzFf
.. section: Library

In ossaudiodev, check that the device isn't closed in several methods.

..

.. bpo: 12009
.. date: 7084
.. nonce: nQPg8Y
.. section: Library

Fixed regression in netrc file comment handling.

..

.. bpo: 12246
.. date: 7083
.. nonce: G9vJ2d
.. section: Library

Warn and fail when trying to install a third-party project from an
uninstalled Python (built in a source checkout).  Original patch by Tshepang
Lekhonkhobe.

..

.. bpo: 10694
.. date: 7082
.. nonce: JD6qXr
.. section: Library

zipfile now ignores garbage at the end of a zipfile.

..

.. bpo: 12283
.. date: 7081
.. nonce: OzN3R-
.. section: Library

Fixed regression in smtplib quoting of leading dots in DATA.

..

.. bpo: 10424
.. date: 7080
.. nonce: 9NKvd_
.. section: Library

Argparse now includes the names of the missing required arguments in the
missing arguments error message.

..

.. bpo: 12168
.. date: 7079
.. nonce: GRVioI
.. section: Library

SysLogHandler now allows NUL termination to be controlled using a new
'append_nul' attribute on the handler.

..

.. bpo: 11583
.. date: 7078
.. nonce: Wu1xMh
.. section: Library

Speed up os.path.isdir on Windows by using GetFileAttributes instead of
os.stat.

..

.. bpo: 12021
.. date: 7077
.. nonce: b_Jq9W
.. section: Library

Make mmap's read() method argument optional. Patch by Petri Lehtinen.

..

.. bpo: 9205
.. date: 7076
.. nonce: IiqgOg
.. section: Library

concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor now detects killed children and
raises BrokenProcessPool in such a situation.  Previously it would reliably
freeze/deadlock.

..

.. bpo: 12040
.. date: 7075
.. nonce: 02V02j
.. section: Library

Expose a new attribute ``sentinel`` on instances of
``multiprocessing.Process``.  Also, fix Process.join() to not use polling
anymore, when given a timeout.

..

.. bpo: 11893
.. date: 7074
.. nonce: iMoME1
.. section: Library

Remove obsolete internal wrapper class ``SSLFakeFile`` in the smtplib
module.  Patch by Catalin Iacob.

..

.. bpo: 12080
.. date: 7073
.. nonce: 8OzcSB
.. section: Library

Fix a Decimal.power() case that took an unreasonably long time to compute.

..

.. bpo: 12221
.. date: 7072
.. nonce: 5xT68z
.. section: Library

Remove __version__ attributes from pyexpat, pickle, tarfile, pydoc, tkinter,
and xml.parsers.expat. This were useless version constants left over from
the Mercurial transition

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7071
.. nonce: aMnclC
.. section: Library

Named tuples now work correctly with vars().

..

.. bpo: 12085
.. date: 7070
.. nonce: cu9-Sp
.. section: Library

Fix an attribute error in subprocess.Popen destructor if the constructor has
failed, e.g. because of an undeclared keyword argument. Patch written by
Oleg Oshmyan.

..

.. bpo: 12028
.. date: 7069
.. nonce: sM5p3N
.. section: Library

Make threading._get_ident() public, rename it to threading.get_ident() and
document it. This function was already used using _thread.get_ident().

..

.. bpo: 12171
.. date: 7068
.. nonce: _FNzN6
.. section: Library

IncrementalEncoder.reset() of CJK codecs (multibytecodec) calls encreset()
instead of decreset().

..

.. bpo: 12218
.. date: 7067
.. nonce: 2aiksQ
.. section: Library

Removed wsgiref.egg-info.

..

.. bpo: 12196
.. date: 7066
.. nonce: xglGPS
.. section: Library

Add pipe2() to the os module.

..

.. bpo: 985064
.. date: 7065
.. nonce: GE6WST
.. section: Library

Make plistlib more resilient to faulty input plists. Patch by Mher
Movsisyan.

..

.. bpo: 1625
.. date: 7064
.. nonce: WPlRjA
.. section: Library

BZ2File and bz2.decompress() now support multi-stream files. Initial patch
by Nir Aides.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 7063
.. nonce: oUmsve
.. section: Library

BufferedReader.read(-1) now calls raw.readall() if available.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 7062
.. nonce: TtIm7y
.. section: Library

FileIO.readall() now only reads the file position and size once.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 7061
.. nonce: 9M55CV
.. section: Library

RawIOBase.readall() now returns None if read() returns None.

..

.. bpo: 12175
.. date: 7060
.. nonce: U3k4iw
.. section: Library

FileIO.readall() now raises a ValueError instead of an IOError if the file
is closed.

..

.. bpo: 11109
.. date: 7059
.. nonce: mYTn5W
.. section: Library

New service_action method for BaseServer, used by ForkingMixin class for
cleanup. Initial Patch by Justin Warkentin.

..

.. bpo: 12045
.. date: 7058
.. nonce: y9PAVO
.. section: Library

Avoid duplicate execution of command in ctypes.util._get_soname().  Patch by
Sijin Joseph.

..

.. bpo: 10818
.. date: 7057
.. nonce: p2OOKt
.. section: Library

Remove the Tk GUI and the serve() function of the pydoc module, pydoc -g has
been deprecated in Python 3.2 and it has a new enhanced web server.

..

.. bpo: 1441530
.. date: 7056
.. nonce: LRBsaM
.. section: Library

In imaplib, read the data in one chunk to speed up large reads and simplify
code.

..

.. bpo: 12070
.. date: 7055
.. nonce: XHrqGH
.. section: Library

Fix the Makefile parser of the sysconfig module to handle correctly
references to "bogus variable" (e.g. "prefix=$/opt/python").

..

.. bpo: 12100
.. date: 7054
.. nonce: 4sb-gJ
.. section: Library

Don't reset incremental encoders of CJK codecs at each call to their
encode() method anymore, but continue to call the reset() method if the
final argument is True.

..

.. bpo: 12049
.. date: 7053
.. nonce: MLrAfb
.. section: Library

Add RAND_bytes() and RAND_pseudo_bytes() functions to the ssl module.

..

.. bpo: 6501
.. date: 7052
.. nonce: _pBcrH
.. section: Library

os.device_encoding() returns None on Windows if the application has no
console.

..

.. bpo: 12105
.. date: 7051
.. nonce: iqnRFC
.. section: Library

Add O_CLOEXEC to the os module.

..

.. bpo: 12079
.. date: 7050
.. nonce: Pa0Xnc
.. section: Library

Decimal('Infinity').fma(Decimal('0'), (3.91224318126786e+19+0j)) now raises
TypeError (reflecting the invalid type of the 3rd argument) rather than
Decimal.InvalidOperation.

..

.. bpo: 12124
.. date: 7049
.. nonce: qpMI7g
.. section: Library

zipimport doesn't keep a reference to zlib.decompress() anymore to be able
to unload the module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7048
.. nonce: MTEU1O
.. section: Library

Add the packaging module, an improved fork of distutils (also known as
distutils2).

..

.. bpo: 12065
.. date: 7047
.. nonce: FBZpyD
.. section: Library

connect_ex() on an SSL socket now returns the original errno when the
socket's timeout expires (it used to return None).

..

.. bpo: 8809
.. date: 7046
.. nonce: mzayBk
.. section: Library

The SMTP_SSL constructor and SMTP.starttls() now support passing a
``context`` argument pointing to an ssl.SSLContext instance. Patch by Kasun
Herath.

..

.. bpo: 9516
.. date: 7045
.. nonce: 1FkfGU
.. section: Library

avoid errors in sysconfig when MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET is set in shell.
(See also: bpo-9516)

..

.. bpo: 8650
.. date: 7044
.. nonce: P1nZQt
.. section: Library

Make zlib module 64-bit clean. compress(), decompress() and their
incremental counterparts now raise OverflowError if given an input larger
than 4GB, instead of silently truncating the input and returning an
incorrect result.

..

.. bpo: 12050
.. date: 7043
.. nonce: v6HF9i
.. section: Library

zlib.decompressobj().decompress() now clears the unconsumed_tail attribute
when called without a max_length argument.

..

.. bpo: 12062
.. date: 7042
.. nonce: HAyT5M
.. section: Library

Fix a flushing bug when doing a certain type of I/O sequence on a file
opened in read+write mode (namely: reading, seeking a bit forward, writing,
then seeking before the previous write but still within buffered data, and
writing again).

..

.. bpo: 9971
.. date: 7041
.. nonce: Z-o-9t
.. section: Library

Write an optimized implementation of BufferedReader.readinto(). Patch by
John O'Connor.

..

.. bpo: 11799
.. date: 7040
.. nonce: _Ozr6W
.. section: Library

urllib.request Authentication Handlers will raise a ValueError when
presented with an unsupported Authentication Scheme. Patch contributed by
Yuval Greenfield.

..

.. bpo: 10419
.. date: 7039
.. nonce: OqiKFb
.. section: Library

build_scripts command of distutils handles correctly non-ASCII path (path to
the Python executable). Open and write the script in binary mode, but ensure
that the shebang is decodable from UTF-8 and from the encoding of the
script. (See also: bpo-6011)

..

.. bpo: 8498
.. date: 7038
.. nonce: 5UEPSK
.. section: Library

In socket.accept(), allow to specify 0 as a backlog value in order to accept
exactly one connection.  Patch by Daniel Evers.

..

.. bpo: 12011
.. date: 7037
.. nonce: TtS2iR
.. section: Library

signal.signal() and signal.siginterrupt() raise an OSError, instead of a
RuntimeError: OSError has an errno attribute.

..

.. bpo: 3709
.. date: 7036
.. nonce: HqOM_3
.. section: Library

add a flush_headers method to BaseHTTPRequestHandler, which manages the
sending of headers to output stream and flushing the internal headers
buffer. Patch contribution by Andrew Schaaf

..

.. bpo: 11743
.. date: 7035
.. nonce: 1AlJlQ
.. section: Library

Rewrite multiprocessing connection classes in pure Python.

..

.. bpo: 11164
.. date: 7034
.. nonce: OUjg8d
.. section: Library

Stop trying to use _xmlplus in the xml module.

..

.. bpo: 11888
.. date: 7033
.. nonce: KH8iKl
.. section: Library

Add log2 function to math module. Patch written by Mark Dickinson.

..

.. bpo: 12012
.. date: 7032
.. nonce: raFUoR
.. section: Library

ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv2 becomes optional.

..

.. bpo: 8407
.. date: 7031
.. nonce: thKVew
.. section: Library

The signal handler writes the signal number as a single byte instead of a
nul byte into the wakeup file descriptor. So it is possible to wait more
than one signal and know which signals were raised.

..

.. bpo: 8407
.. date: 7030
.. nonce: qQClST
.. section: Library

Add pthread_kill(), sigpending() and sigwait() functions to the signal
module.

..

.. bpo: 11927
.. date: 7029
.. nonce: UqvRAV
.. section: Library

SMTP_SSL now uses port 465 by default as documented.  Patch by Kasun Herath.

..

.. bpo: 12002
.. date: 7028
.. nonce: ySceLp
.. section: Library

ftplib's abort() method raises TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 11916
.. date: 7027
.. nonce: C6SFtK
.. section: Library

Add a number of MacOSX specific definitions to the errno module. Patch by
Pierre Carrier.

..

.. bpo: 11999
.. date: 7026
.. nonce: aLa-HD
.. section: Library

fixed sporadic sync failure mailbox.Maildir due to its trying to detect
mtime changes by comparing to the system clock instead of to the previous
value of the mtime.

..

.. bpo: 11072
.. date: 7025
.. nonce: _qLz7b
.. section: Library

added MLSD command (RFC-3659) support to ftplib.

..

.. bpo: 8808
.. date: 7024
.. nonce: i3pQ9N
.. section: Library

The IMAP4_SSL constructor now allows passing an SSLContext parameter to
control parameters of the secure channel.  Patch by Sijin Joseph.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7023
.. nonce: asMCib
.. section: Library

ntpath.samefile failed to notice that "a.txt" and "A.TXT" refer to the same
file on Windows XP. As noticed in issue #10684.

..

.. bpo: 12000
.. date: 7022
.. nonce: naVBbY
.. section: Library

When a SSL certificate has a subjectAltName without any dNSName entry,
ssl.match_hostname() should use the subject's commonName. Patch by Nicolas
Bareil.

..

.. bpo: 10775
.. date: 7021
.. nonce: dKr3L1
.. section: Library

assertRaises, assertRaisesRegex, assertWarns, and assertWarnsRegex now
accept a keyword argument 'msg' when used as context managers.  Initial
patch by Winston Ewert.

..

.. bpo: 10684
.. date: 7020
.. nonce: Ctye6o
.. section: Library

shutil.move used to delete a folder on case insensitive filesystems when the
source and destination name where the same except for the case.

..

.. bpo: 11647
.. date: 7019
.. nonce: bQbrSQ
.. section: Library

objects created using contextlib.contextmanager now support more than one
call to the function when used as a decorator. Initial patch by Ysj Ray.

..

.. bpo: 11930
.. date: 7018
.. nonce: SoqpJZ
.. section: Library

Removed deprecated time.accept2dyear variable. Removed year >= 1000
restriction from datetime.strftime.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7017
.. nonce: IpkrD1
.. section: Library

logging: don't define QueueListener if Python has no thread support.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7016
.. nonce: LjAjbQ
.. section: Library

functools.cmp_to_key() now works with collections.Hashable().

..

.. bpo: 11277
.. date: 7015
.. nonce: 4nCUxv
.. section: Library

mmap.mmap() calls fcntl(fd, F_FULLFSYNC) on Mac OS X to get around a mmap
bug with sparse files. Patch written by Steffen Daode Nurpmeso.

..

.. bpo: 8407
.. date: 7014
.. nonce: sa_qWj
.. section: Library

Add signal.pthread_sigmask() function to fetch and/or change the signal mask
of the calling thread.

..

.. bpo: 11858
.. date: 7013
.. nonce: d8k_Bq
.. section: Library

configparser.ExtendedInterpolation expected lower-case section names.

..

.. bpo: 11324
.. date: 7012
.. nonce: efNvmn
.. section: Library

ConfigParser(interpolation=None) now works correctly.

..

.. bpo: 11811
.. date: 7011
.. nonce: zPdTcR
.. section: Library

ssl.get_server_certificate() is now IPv6-compatible.  Patch by Charles-
François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11763
.. date: 7010
.. nonce: LPGrnG
.. section: Library

don't use difflib in TestCase.assertMultiLineEqual if the strings are too
long.

..

.. bpo: 11236
.. date: 7009
.. nonce: DyWdnL
.. section: Library

getpass.getpass responds to ctrl-c or ctrl-z on terminal.

..

.. bpo: 11856
.. date: 7008
.. nonce: cOY1P0
.. section: Library

Speed up parsing of JSON numbers.

..

.. bpo: 11005
.. date: 7007
.. nonce: qK2lXb
.. section: Library

threading.RLock()._release_save() raises a RuntimeError if the lock was not
acquired.

..

.. bpo: 11258
.. date: 7006
.. nonce: ByPGev
.. section: Library

Speed up ctypes.util.find_library() under Linux by a factor of 5 to 10.
Initial patch by Jonas H.

..

.. bpo: 11382
.. date: 7005
.. nonce: nUdK_g
.. section: Library

Trivial system calls, such as dup() or pipe(), needn't release the GIL.
Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11223
.. date: 7004
.. nonce: eTi4MT
.. section: Library

Add threading._info() function providing informations about the thread
implementation.

..

.. bpo: 11731
.. date: 7003
.. nonce: BtJ0ZE
.. section: Library

simplify/enhance email parser/generator API by introducing policy objects.

..

.. bpo: 11768
.. date: 7002
.. nonce: HRg5Hy
.. section: Library

The signal handler of the signal module only calls Py_AddPendingCall() for
the first signal to fix a deadlock on reentrant or parallel calls.
PyErr_SetInterrupt() writes also into the wake up file.

..

.. bpo: 11492
.. date: 7001
.. nonce: Ivqdzz
.. section: Library

fix several issues with header folding in the email package.

..

.. bpo: 11852
.. date: 7000
.. nonce: LXhUki
.. section: Library

Add missing imports and update tests.

..

.. bpo: 11875
.. date: 6999
.. nonce: xFn-yD
.. section: Library

collections.OrderedDict's __reduce__ was temporarily mutating the object
instead of just working on a copy.

..

.. bpo: 11467
.. date: 6998
.. nonce: th8B0N
.. section: Library

Fix urlparse behavior when handling urls which contains scheme specific part
only digits. Patch by Santoso Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6997
.. nonce: MOd782
.. section: Library

collections.Counter().copy() now works correctly for subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 11474
.. date: 6996
.. nonce: UKTAWA
.. section: Library

Fix the bug with url2pathname() handling of '/C|/' on Windows. Patch by
Santoso Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 11684
.. date: 6995
.. nonce: izuveW
.. section: Library

complete email.parser bytes API by adding BytesHeaderParser.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6994
.. nonce: 2EP4gU
.. section: Library

The bz2 module now handles 4GiB+ input buffers correctly.

..

.. bpo: 9233
.. date: 6993
.. nonce: AIRcqi
.. section: Library

Fix json.loads('{}') to return a dict (instead of a list), when _json is not
available.

..

.. bpo: 11830
.. date: 6992
.. nonce: XeNc48
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary introspection code in the decimal module.

..

.. bpo: 11703
.. date: 6991
.. nonce: hwI5Mw
.. section: Library

urllib2.geturl() does not return correct url when the original url contains
#fragment.

..

.. bpo: 10019
.. date: 6990
.. nonce: J7QVFU
.. section: Library

Fixed regression in json module where an indent of 0 stopped adding newlines
and acted instead like 'None'.

..

.. bpo: 11186
.. date: 6989
.. nonce: qu3iUb
.. section: Library

pydoc ignores a module if its name contains a surrogate character in the
index of modules.

..

.. bpo: 11815
.. date: 6988
.. nonce: BpBrgi
.. section: Library

Use a light-weight SimpleQueue for the result queue in
concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor.

..

.. bpo: 5162
.. date: 6987
.. nonce: UYJrO-
.. section: Library

Treat services like frozen executables to allow child spawning from
multiprocessing.forking on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6986
.. nonce: XxWMZ2
.. section: Library

logging.basicConfig now supports an optional 'handlers' argument taking an
iterable of handlers to be added to the root logger. Additional parameter
checks were also added to basicConfig.

..

.. bpo: 11814
.. date: 6985
.. nonce: yh-Xda
.. section: Library

Fix likely typo in multiprocessing.Pool._terminate().

..

.. bpo: 11747
.. date: 6984
.. nonce: lKOBOF
.. section: Library

Fix range formatting in difflib.context_diff() and difflib.unified_diff().

..

.. bpo: 8428
.. date: 6983
.. nonce: vVu7J6
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in multiprocessing.Pool when terminating worker
processes: new processes would be spawned while the pool is being shut down.
Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 2650
.. date: 6982
.. nonce: djYtFZ
.. section: Library

re.escape() no longer escapes the '_'.

..

.. bpo: 11757
.. date: 6981
.. nonce: 3CIyys
.. section: Library

select.select() now raises ValueError when a negative timeout is passed
(previously, a select.error with EINVAL would be raised).  Patch by Charles-
François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 7311
.. date: 6980
.. nonce: nkDzzK
.. section: Library

fix html.parser to accept non-ASCII attribute values.

..

.. bpo: 11605
.. date: 6979
.. nonce: abhSAm
.. section: Library

email.parser.BytesFeedParser was incorrectly converting multipart subparts
with an 8-bit CTE into unicode instead of preserving the bytes.

..

.. bpo: 1690608
.. date: 6978
.. nonce: _T2fOa
.. section: Library

email.util.formataddr is now RFC 2047 aware: it now has a charset parameter
that defaults to utf-8 and is used as the charset for RFC 2047 encoding when
the realname contains non-ASCII characters.

..

.. bpo: 10963
.. date: 6977
.. nonce: _J-MW9
.. section: Library

Ensure that subprocess.communicate() never raises EPIPE.

..

.. bpo: 10791
.. date: 6976
.. nonce: mHfCtE
.. section: Library

Implement missing method GzipFile.read1(), allowing GzipFile to be wrapped
in a TextIOWrapper.  Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 11707
.. date: 6975
.. nonce: cmDQZT
.. section: Library

Added a fast C version of functools.cmp_to_key(). Patch by Filip
Gruszczyński.

..

.. bpo: 11688
.. date: 6974
.. nonce: Uuorl0
.. section: Library

Add sqlite3.Connection.set_trace_callback().  Patch by Torsten Landschoff.

..

.. bpo: 11746
.. date: 6973
.. nonce: kN0IW0
.. section: Library

Fix SSLContext.load_cert_chain() to accept elliptic curve private keys.

..

.. bpo: 5863
.. date: 6972
.. nonce: ixlLlC
.. section: Library

Rewrite BZ2File in pure Python, and allow it to accept file-like objects
using a new ``fileobj`` constructor argument.  Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6971
.. nonce: L28oNg
.. section: Library

unittest.TestCase.assertSameElements has been removed.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6970
.. nonce: qBQpRY
.. section: Library

sys.getfilesystemencoding() raises a RuntimeError if initfsencoding() was
not called yet: detect bootstrap (startup) issues earlier.

..

.. bpo: 11393
.. date: 6969
.. nonce: gBYtdm
.. section: Library

Add the new faulthandler module.

..

.. bpo: 11618
.. date: 6968
.. nonce: PIi14g
.. section: Library

Fix the timeout logic in threading.Lock.acquire() under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6967
.. nonce: wWchne
.. section: Library

Removed the 'strict' argument to email.parser.Parser, which has been
deprecated since Python 2.4.

..

.. bpo: 11256
.. date: 6966
.. nonce: AVqrHZ
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs on functions that take only keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 11696
.. date: 6965
.. nonce: dzz7nM
.. section: Library

Fix ID generation in msilib.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6964
.. nonce: aKw9Fi
.. section: Library

itertools.accumulate now supports an optional *func* argument for a user-
supplied binary function.

..

.. bpo: 11692
.. date: 6963
.. nonce: aWiGD_
.. section: Library

Remove unnecessary demo functions in subprocess module.

..

.. bpo: 9696
.. date: 6962
.. nonce: Nh0u8J
.. section: Library

Fix exception incorrectly raised by xdrlib.Packer.pack_int when trying to
pack a negative (in-range) integer.

..

.. bpo: 11675
.. date: 6961
.. nonce: qFfmkU
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.[Raw]Array objects created from an integer size are now
zeroed on creation.  This matches the behaviour specified by the
documentation.

..

.. bpo: 7639
.. date: 6960
.. nonce: ttVfZV
.. section: Library

Fix short file name generation in bdist_msi

..

.. bpo: 11635
.. date: 6959
.. nonce: ErmdVh
.. section: Library

Don't use polling in worker threads and processes launched by
concurrent.futures.

..

.. bpo: 5845
.. date: 6958
.. nonce: V5g-10
.. section: Library

Automatically read readline configuration to enable completion in
interactive mode.

..

.. bpo: 6811
.. date: 6957
.. nonce: P4Ow1B
.. section: Library

Allow importlib to change a code object's co_filename attribute to match the
path to where the source code currently is, not where the code object
originally came from.

..

.. bpo: 8754
.. date: 6956
.. nonce: DgUK1D
.. section: Library

Have importlib use the repr of a module name in error messages.

..

.. bpo: 11591
.. date: 6955
.. nonce: 3MRS7c
.. section: Library

Prevent "import site" from modifying sys.path when python was started with
-S.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6954
.. nonce: NdkoX9
.. section: Library

collections.namedtuple() now adds a _source attribute to the generated
class.  This make the source more accessible than the outdated "verbose"
option which prints to stdout but doesn't make the source string available.

..

.. bpo: 11371
.. date: 6953
.. nonce: 3bqYOV
.. section: Library

Mark getopt error messages as localizable.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński.

..

.. bpo: 11333
.. date: 6952
.. nonce: JTagBm
.. section: Library

Add __slots__ to collections ABCs.

..

.. bpo: 11628
.. date: 6951
.. nonce: yPBMU_
.. section: Library

cmp_to_key generated class should use __slots__.

..

.. bpo: 11666
.. date: 6950
.. nonce: Hni56e
.. section: Library

let help() display named tuple attributes and methods that start with a
leading underscore.

..

.. bpo: 11662
.. date: 6949
.. nonce: GpHbgk
.. section: Library

Make urllib and urllib2 ignore redirections if the scheme is not HTTP, HTTPS
or FTP (CVE-2011-1521).

..

.. bpo: 5537
.. date: 6948
.. nonce: q0UE2m
.. section: Library

Fix time2isoz() and time2netscape() functions of httplib.cookiejar for
expiration year greater than 2038 on 32-bit systems.

..

.. bpo: 4391
.. date: 6947
.. nonce: GMIMpz
.. section: Library

Use proper gettext plural forms in optparse.

..

.. bpo: 11127
.. date: 6946
.. nonce: 4GWP_C
.. section: Library

Raise a TypeError when trying to pickle a socket object.

..

.. bpo: 11563
.. date: 6945
.. nonce: 702cVt
.. section: Library

``Connection: close`` header is sent by requests using URLOpener class which
helps in closing of sockets after connection is over. Patch contributions by
Jeff McNeil and Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 11459
.. date: 6944
.. nonce: f4i9Bf
.. section: Library

A ``bufsize`` value of 0 in subprocess.Popen() really creates unbuffered
pipes, such that select() works properly on them.

..

.. bpo: 5421
.. date: 6943
.. nonce: 4wp0pz
.. section: Library

Fix misleading error message when one of socket.sendto()'s arguments has the
wrong type.  Patch by Nikita Vetoshkin.

..

.. bpo: 10812
.. date: 6942
.. nonce: SDYHye
.. section: Library

Add some extra posix functions to the os module.

..

.. bpo: 10979
.. date: 6941
.. nonce: FjyVrT
.. section: Library

unittest stdout buffering now works with class and module setup and
teardown.

..

.. bpo: 11243
.. date: 6940
.. nonce: _emVe6
.. section: Library

fix the parameter querying methods of Message to work if the headers contain
un-encoded non-ASCII data.

..

.. bpo: 11401
.. date: 6939
.. nonce: 7UJeno
.. section: Library

fix handling of headers with no value; this fixes a regression relative to
Python2 and the result is now the same as it was in Python2.

..

.. bpo: 9298
.. date: 6938
.. nonce: FZ6yRG
.. section: Library

base64 bodies weren't being folded to line lengths less than 78, which was a
regression relative to Python2.  Unlike Python2, the last line of the folded
body now ends with a carriage return.

..

.. bpo: 11560
.. date: 6937
.. nonce: YdCxl_
.. section: Library

shutil.unpack_archive now correctly handles the format parameter. Patch by
Evan Dandrea.

..

.. bpo: 5870
.. date: 6936
.. nonce: MbVhBZ
.. section: Library

Add `subprocess.DEVNULL` constant.

..

.. bpo: 11133
.. date: 6935
.. nonce: _4ZD-9
.. section: Library

fix two cases where inspect.getattr_static can trigger code execution. Patch
by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 11569
.. date: 6934
.. nonce: fp461F
.. section: Library

use absolute path to the sysctl command in multiprocessing to ensure that it
will be found regardless of the shell PATH. This ensures that
multiprocessing.cpu_count works on default installs of MacOSX.

..

.. bpo: 11501
.. date: 6933
.. nonce: -vZ32Q
.. section: Library

disutils.archive_utils.make_zipfile no longer fails if zlib is not
installed. Instead, the zipfile.ZIP_STORED compression is used to create the
ZipFile. Patch by Natalia B. Bidart.

..

.. bpo: 11289
.. date: 6932
.. nonce: aDbXm5
.. section: Library

`smtp.SMTP` class is now a context manager so it can be used in a `with`
statement.  Contributed by Giampaolo Rodola.

..

.. bpo: 11554
.. date: 6931
.. nonce: MYdNID
.. section: Library

Fixed support for Japanese codecs; previously the body output encoding was
not done if euc-jp or shift-jis was specified as the charset.

..

.. bpo: 11407
.. date: 6930
.. nonce: bSuznF
.. section: Library

`TestCase.run` returns the result object used or created. Contributed by
Janathan Hartley.

..

.. bpo: 11500
.. date: 6929
.. nonce: 4VGZ_H
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in the OS X proxy bypass code for fully qualified IP addresses
in the proxy exception list.

..

.. bpo: 11491
.. date: 6928
.. nonce: 9AofzL
.. section: Library

dbm.error is no longer raised when dbm.open is called with the "n" as the
flag argument and the file exists. The behavior matches the documentation
and general logic.

..

.. bpo: 1162477
.. date: 6927
.. nonce: IqG00q
.. section: Library

Postel Principle adjustment to email date parsing: handle the fact that some
non-compliant MUAs use '.' instead of ':' in time specs.

..

.. bpo: 11131
.. date: 6926
.. nonce: dFvbxY
.. section: Library

Fix sign of zero in decimal.Decimal plus and minus operations when the
rounding mode is ROUND_FLOOR.

..

.. bpo: 9935
.. date: 6925
.. nonce: ByimAG
.. section: Library

Speed up pickling of instances of user-defined classes.

..

.. bpo: 5622
.. date: 6924
.. nonce: dM7tnW
.. section: Library

Fix curses.wrapper to raise correct exception if curses initialization
fails.

..

.. bpo: 11408
.. date: 6923
.. nonce: 2I9Wug
.. section: Library

In threading.Lock.acquire(), only call gettimeofday() when really necessary.
Patch by Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11391
.. date: 6922
.. nonce: hdoRPe
.. section: Library

Writing to a mmap object created with ``mmap.PROT_READ|mmap.PROT_EXEC``
would segfault instead of raising a TypeError.  Patch by Charles-François
Natali.

..

.. bpo: 9795
.. date: 6921
.. nonce: emEJ5A
.. section: Library

add context manager protocol support for nntplib.NNTP class.

..

.. bpo: 11306
.. date: 6920
.. nonce: 2rXDt4
.. section: Library

mailbox in certain cases adapts to an inability to open certain files in
read-write mode.  Previously it detected this by checking for EACCES, now it
also checks for EROFS.

..

.. bpo: 11265
.. date: 6919
.. nonce: Y51oyn
.. section: Library

asyncore now correctly handles EPIPE, EBADF and EAGAIN errors on accept(),
send() and recv().

..

.. bpo: 11377
.. date: 6918
.. nonce: egHPHS
.. section: Library

Deprecate platform.popen() and reimplement it with os.popen().

..

.. bpo: 8513
.. date: 6917
.. nonce: h1wmX9
.. section: Library

On UNIX, subprocess supports bytes command string.

..

.. bpo: 10866
.. date: 6916
.. nonce: u6K21Z
.. section: Library

Add socket.sethostname().  Initial patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 11140
.. date: 6915
.. nonce: LHg9_O
.. section: Library

Lock.release() now raises a RuntimeError when attempting to release an
unacquired lock, as claimed in the threading documentation. The
_thread.error exception is now an alias of RuntimeError.  Patch by Filip
Gruszczyński.  Patch for _dummy_thread by Aymeric Augustin.

..

.. bpo: 8594
.. date: 6914
.. nonce: LUyo_-
.. section: Library

ftplib now provides a source_address parameter to specify which (address,
port) to bind to before connecting.

..

.. bpo: 11326
.. date: 6913
.. nonce: 2GUPyU
.. section: Library

Add the missing connect_ex() implementation for SSL sockets, and make it
work for non-blocking connects.

..

.. bpo: 11297
.. date: 6912
.. nonce: bGgJwA
.. section: Library

Add collections.ChainMap().

..

.. bpo: 10755
.. date: 6911
.. nonce: 0XO-4U
.. section: Library

Add the posix.flistdir() function.  Patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 4761
.. date: 6910
.. nonce: Z7tR3t
.. section: Library

Add the ``*at()`` family of functions (openat(), etc.) to the posix module.
Patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 7322
.. date: 6909
.. nonce: jfgOL8
.. section: Library

Trying to read from a socket's file-like object after a timeout occurred now
raises an error instead of silently losing data.

..

.. bpo: 11291
.. date: 6908
.. nonce: NY4uFI
.. section: Library

poplib.POP no longer suppresses errors on quit().

..

.. bpo: 11177
.. date: 6907
.. nonce: M6R7fe
.. section: Library

asyncore's create_socket() arguments can now be omitted.

..

.. bpo: 6064
.. date: 6906
.. nonce: 4URz7L
.. section: Library

Add a ``daemon`` keyword argument to the threading.Thread and
multiprocessing.Process constructors in order to override the default
behaviour of inheriting the daemonic property from the current
thread/process.

..

.. bpo: 10956
.. date: 6905
.. nonce: ArNOt6
.. section: Library

Buffered I/O classes retry reading or writing after a signal has arrived and
the handler returned successfully.

..

.. bpo: 10784
.. date: 6904
.. nonce: xKXqdg
.. section: Library

New os.getpriority() and os.setpriority() functions.

..

.. bpo: 11114
.. date: 6903
.. nonce: jQcNdM
.. section: Library

Fix catastrophic performance of tell() on text files (up to 1000x faster in
some cases).  It is still one to two order of magnitudes slower than binary
tell().

..

.. bpo: 10882
.. date: 6902
.. nonce: kxNAqA
.. section: Library

Add os.sendfile function.

..

.. bpo: 10868
.. date: 6901
.. nonce: YrdKiG
.. section: Library

Allow usage of the register method of an ABC as a class decorator.

..

.. bpo: 11224
.. date: 6900
.. nonce: G2n8Hf
.. section: Library

Fixed a regression in tarfile that affected the file-like objects returned
by TarFile.extractfile() regarding performance, memory consumption and
failures with the stream interface.

..

.. bpo: 10924
.. date: 6899
.. nonce: FqL1oP
.. section: Library

Adding salt and Modular Crypt Format to crypt library. Moved old C wrapper
to _crypt, and added a Python wrapper with enhanced salt generation and
simpler API for password generation.

..

.. bpo: 11074
.. date: 6898
.. nonce: mVUwxu
.. section: Library

Make 'tokenize' so it can be reloaded.

..

.. bpo: 11085
.. date: 6897
.. nonce: PKAM9L
.. section: Library

Moved collections abstract base classes into a separate module called
collections.abc, following the pattern used by importlib.abc. For backwards
compatibility, the names are imported into the collections module.

..

.. bpo: 4681
.. date: 6896
.. nonce: I20jgq
.. section: Library

Allow mmap() to work on file sizes and offsets larger than 4GB, even on
32-bit builds.  Initial patch by Ross Lagerwall, adapted for 32-bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 11169
.. date: 6895
.. nonce: ggHFKQ
.. section: Library

compileall module uses repr() to format filenames and paths to escape
surrogate characters and show spaces.

..

.. bpo: 11089
.. date: 6894
.. nonce: 0lBf9j
.. section: Library

Fix performance issue limiting the use of ConfigParser() with large config
files.

..

.. bpo: 10276
.. date: 6893
.. nonce: qVeMft
.. section: Library

Fix the results of zlib.crc32() and zlib.adler32() on buffers larger than
4GB.  Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 11388
.. date: 6892
.. nonce: ehK5Tz
.. section: Library

Added a clear() method to MutableSequence

..

.. bpo: 11174
.. date: 6891
.. nonce: if_LrS
.. section: Library

Add argparse.MetavarTypeHelpFormatter, which uses type names for the names
of optional and positional arguments in help messages.

..

.. bpo: 9348
.. date: 6890
.. nonce: zsJPPj
.. section: Library

Raise an early error if argparse nargs and metavar don't match.

..

.. bpo: 9026
.. date: 6889
.. nonce: 2xqEFT
.. section: Library

Fix order of argparse sub-commands in help messages.

..

.. bpo: 9347
.. date: 6888
.. nonce: R8xBsQ
.. section: Library

Fix formatting for tuples in argparse type= error messages.

..

.. bpo: 12191
.. date: 6887
.. nonce: IRs2VK
.. section: Library

Added shutil.chown() to change user and/or group owner of a given path also
specifying their names.

..

.. bpo: 13988
.. date: 6886
.. nonce: vIrAol
.. section: Library

The _elementtree accelerator is used whenever available. Now
xml.etree.cElementTree becomes a deprecated alias to ElementTree.

..

.. bpo: 6807
.. date: 6885
.. nonce: lfskSG
.. section: Build

Run msisupport.mak earlier.

..

.. bpo: 10580
.. date: 6884
.. nonce: GkwWHF
.. section: Build

Minor grammar change in Windows installer.

..

.. bpo: 13326
.. date: 6883
.. nonce: A5vc-h
.. section: Build

Clean __pycache__ directories correctly on OpenBSD.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6882
.. nonce: X0qbPA
.. section: Build

PEP 393: the configure option --with-wide-unicode is removed.

..

.. bpo: 12852
.. date: 6881
.. nonce: L3yoLo
.. section: Build

Set _XOPEN_SOURCE to 700, instead of 600, to get POSIX 2008 functions on
OpenBSD (e.g. fdopendir).

..

.. bpo: 11863
.. date: 6880
.. nonce: K5wTQP
.. section: Build

Remove support for legacy systems deprecated in Python 3.2 (following PEP
11).  These systems are systems using Mach C Threads, SunOS lightweight
processes, GNU pth threads and IRIX threads.

..

.. bpo: 8746
.. date: 6879
.. nonce: 4wBblz
.. section: Build

Correct faulty configure checks so that os.chflags() and os.lchflags() are
once again built on systems that support these functions (BSD and OS X).
Also add new stat file flags for OS X (UF_HIDDEN and UF_COMPRESSED).

..

.. bpo: 10645
.. date: 6878
.. nonce: O0VaIT
.. section: Build

Installing Python no longer creates a Python-X.Y.Z-pyX.Y.egg-info file in
the lib-dynload directory.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6877
.. nonce: eVQr4T
.. section: Build

Do not accidentally include the directory containing sqlite.h twice when
building sqlite3.

..

.. bpo: 11217
.. date: 6876
.. nonce: mIEwfc
.. section: Build

For 64-bit/32-bit Mac OS X universal framework builds, ensure "make install"
creates symlinks in --prefix bin for the "-32" files in the framework bin
directory like the installer does.

..

.. bpo: 11347
.. date: 6875
.. nonce: mQxebN
.. section: Build

Use --no-as-needed when linking libpython3.so.

..

.. bpo: 11411
.. date: 6874
.. nonce: 1m9fjv
.. section: Build

Fix 'make DESTDIR=' with a relative destination.

..

.. bpo: 11268
.. date: 6873
.. nonce: Lgcka6
.. section: Build

Prevent Mac OS X Installer failure if Documentation package had previously
been installed.

..

.. bpo: 11495
.. date: 6872
.. nonce: h16zox
.. section: Build

OSF support is eliminated. It was deprecated in Python 3.2.

..

.. bpo: 14409
.. date: 6871
.. nonce: 8SNyRR
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now properly executes commands in the Shell window when it cannot read
the normal config files on startup and has to use the built-in default key
bindings. There was previously a bug in one of the defaults.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6870
.. nonce: ridGZu
.. section: IDLE

IDLE can be launched as python -m idlelib

..

.. bpo: 3573
.. date: 6869
.. nonce: FIbWrY
.. section: IDLE

IDLE hangs when passing invalid command line args (directory(ies) instead of
file(s)) (Patch by Guilherme Polo)

..

.. bpo: 14200
.. date: 6868
.. nonce: XVdh7w
.. section: IDLE

IDLE shell crash on printing non-BMP unicode character.

..

.. bpo: 5219
.. date: 6867
.. nonce: We72rp
.. section: IDLE

Prevent event handler cascade in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 964437
.. date: 6866
.. nonce: buwNGK
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE help window non-modal. Patch by Guilherme Polo and Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 13933
.. date: 6865
.. nonce: 5CAw8l
.. section: IDLE

IDLE auto-complete did not work with some imported module, like hashlib.
(Patch by Roger Serwy)

..

.. bpo: 13506
.. date: 6864
.. nonce: ztXHhD
.. section: IDLE

Add '' to path for IDLE Shell when started and restarted with Restart Shell.
Original patches by Marco Scataglini and Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 4625
.. date: 6863
.. nonce: 0SHZWo
.. section: IDLE

If IDLE cannot write to its recent file or breakpoint files, display a
message popup and continue rather than crash.  Original patch by Roger
Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 8641
.. date: 6862
.. nonce: dzqFtr
.. section: IDLE

Update IDLE 3 syntax coloring to recognize b".." and not u"..". Patch by Tal
Einat.

..

.. bpo: 13296
.. date: 6861
.. nonce: bMHIFe
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE to clear compile __future__ flags on shell restart. (Patch by Roger
Serwy)

..

.. bpo: 9871
.. date: 6860
.. nonce: ViYtMq
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE 3 crash when given byte stings with invalid hex escape
sequences, like b'\x0'. (Original patch by Claudiu Popa.)

..

.. bpo: 12636
.. date: 6859
.. nonce: TARH29
.. section: IDLE

IDLE reads the coding cookie when executing a Python script.

..

.. bpo: 12540
.. date: 6858
.. nonce: J18oWI
.. section: IDLE

Prevent zombie IDLE processes on Windows due to changes in os.kill().

..

.. bpo: 12590
.. date: 6857
.. nonce: dcDjo7
.. section: IDLE

IDLE editor window now always displays the first line when opening a long
file.  With Tk 8.5, the first line was hidden.

..

.. bpo: 11088
.. date: 6856
.. nonce: 08NI5v
.. section: IDLE

don't crash when using F5 to run a script in IDLE on MacOSX with Tk 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 1028
.. date: 6855
.. nonce: 59BMpc
.. section: IDLE

Tk returns invalid Unicode null in %A: UnicodeDecodeError. With Tk < 8.5
_tkinter.c:PythonCmd() raised UnicodeDecodeError, caused IDLE to exit.
Converted to valid Unicode null in PythonCmd().

..

.. bpo: 11718
.. date: 6854
.. nonce: giS1iY
.. section: IDLE

IDLE's open module dialog couldn't find the __init__.py file in a package.

..

.. bpo: 14053
.. date: 6853
.. nonce: tR4DDC
.. section: Tools/Demos

patchcheck.py ("make patchcheck") now works with MQ patches. Patch by
Francisco Martín Brugué.

..

.. bpo: 13930
.. date: 6852
.. nonce: jUdfJ-
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 is now able to write its converted output files to another directory
tree as well as copying unchanged files and altering the file suffix.  See
its new -o, -W and --add-suffix options.  This makes it more useful in many
automated code translation workflows.

..

.. bpo: 13628
.. date: 6851
.. nonce: XznUD3
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb.py is now able to retrieve more frames in the Python traceback if
Python is optimized.

..

.. bpo: 11996
.. date: 6850
.. nonce: 0vXv50
.. section: Tools/Demos

libpython (gdb), replace "py-bt" command by "py-bt-full" and add a smarter
"py-bt" command printing a classic Python traceback.

..

.. bpo: 11179
.. date: 6849
.. nonce: EdCIMF
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make ccbench work under Python 3.1 and 2.7 again.

..

.. bpo: 10639
.. date: 6848
.. nonce: 49RqQh
.. section: Tools/Demos

reindent.py no longer converts newlines and will raise an error if
attempting to convert a file with mixed newlines. "--newline" option added
to specify new line character.

..

.. bpo: 16847
.. date: 6847
.. nonce: bJAkOo
.. section: Library

Fixed improper use of _PyUnicode_CheckConsistency() in non-pydebug builds.
Several extension modules now compile cleanly when assert()s are enabled in
standard builds (-DDEBUG flag).

..

.. bpo: 13840
.. date: 6846
.. nonce: px8cx7
.. section: Library

The error message produced by ctypes.create_string_buffer when given a
Unicode string has been fixed.

..

.. bpo: 9975
.. date: 6845
.. nonce: 2SRKp5
.. section: Library

socket: Fix incorrect use of flowinfo and scope_id. Patch by Vilmos Nebehaj.

..

.. bpo: 7777
.. date: 6844
.. nonce: ir5TxQ
.. section: Library

socket: Add Reliable Datagram Sockets (PF_RDS) support.

..

.. bpo: 13159
.. date: 6843
.. nonce: Y91UZj
.. section: Library

FileIO and BZ2Compressor/BZ2Decompressor now use a linear-time buffer growth
strategy instead of a quadratic-time one.

..

.. bpo: 10141
.. date: 6842
.. nonce: 2Bc-WI
.. section: Library

socket: Add SocketCAN (PF_CAN) support. Initial patch by Matthias Fuchs,
updated by Tiago Gonçalves.

..

.. bpo: 13070
.. date: 6841
.. nonce: zcoYVY
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when a TextIOWrapper caught in a reference cycle would be
finalized after the reference to its underlying BufferedRWPair's writer got
cleared by the GC.

..

.. bpo: 12881
.. date: 6840
.. nonce: IpOO6j
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix segfault with large structure field names.

..

.. bpo: 13058
.. date: 6839
.. nonce: KJ3kEA
.. section: Library

ossaudiodev: fix a file descriptor leak on error. Patch by Thomas Jarosch.

..

.. bpo: 13013
.. date: 6838
.. nonce: KLH96V
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix a reference leak in PyCArrayType_from_ctype. Thanks to Suman
Saha for finding the bug and providing a patch.

..

.. bpo: 13022
.. date: 6837
.. nonce: zeo8hs
.. section: Library

Fix: _multiprocessing.recvfd() doesn't check that file descriptor was
actually received.

..

.. bpo: 1172711
.. date: 6836
.. nonce: is5nD7
.. section: Library

Add 'long long' support to the array module. Initial patch by Oren Tirosh
and Hirokazu Yamamoto.

..

.. bpo: 12483
.. date: 6835
.. nonce: IpGhKV
.. section: Library

ctypes: Fix a crash when the destruction of a callback object triggers the
garbage collector.

..

.. bpo: 12950
.. date: 6834
.. nonce: Z7xl-R
.. section: Library

Fix passing file descriptors in multiprocessing, under OpenIndiana/Illumos.

..

.. bpo: 12764
.. date: 6833
.. nonce: YtBoIj
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in ctypes when the name of a Structure field is not a string.

..

.. bpo: 11241
.. date: 6832
.. nonce: GEE_88
.. section: Library

subclasses of ctypes.Array can now be subclassed.

..

.. bpo: 9651
.. date: 6831
.. nonce: INPcwf
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when ctypes.create_string_buffer(0) was passed to some functions
like file.write().

..

.. bpo: 10309
.. date: 6830
.. nonce: -z_Mxz
.. section: Library

Define _GNU_SOURCE so that mremap() gets the proper signature.  Without
this, architectures where sizeof void* != sizeof int are broken.  Patch
given by Hallvard B Furuseth.

..

.. bpo: 12051
.. date: 6829
.. nonce: 7HjY_U
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in json.dumps() while encoding highly-nested objects using the
C accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 12017
.. date: 6828
.. nonce: w25YNq
.. section: Library

Fix segfault in json.loads() while decoding highly-nested objects using the
C accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 1838
.. date: 6827
.. nonce: EzKU3z
.. section: Library

Prevent segfault in ctypes, when _as_parameter_ on a class is set to an
instance of the class.

..

.. bpo: 13125
.. date: 6826
.. nonce: 8BjUbr
.. section: Tests

Silence spurious test_lib2to3 output when in non-verbose mode. Patch by
Mikhail Novikov.

..

.. bpo: 13447
.. date: 6825
.. nonce: _wys-6
.. section: Tests

Add a test file to host regression tests for bugs in the scripts found in
the Tools directory.

..

.. bpo: 10881
.. date: 6824
.. nonce: r-D2Ib
.. section: Tests

Fix test_site failure with OS X framework builds.

..

.. bpo: 13901
.. date: 6823
.. nonce: ICKGPH
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_distutils failures on OS X with --enable-shared.

..

.. bpo: 13862
.. date: 6822
.. nonce: LHCO8n
.. section: Tests

Fix spurious failure in test_zlib due to runtime/compile time minor versions
not matching.

..

.. bpo: 12804
.. date: 6821
.. nonce: ELp5o1
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket and test_urllib2net failures when running tests on a system
without internet access.

..

.. bpo: 13726
.. date: 6820
.. nonce: xd336V
.. section: Tests

Fix the ambiguous -S flag in regrtest. It is -o/--slow for slow tests.

..

.. bpo: 11659
.. date: 6819
.. nonce: CsfDgK
.. section: Tests

Fix ResourceWarning in test_subprocess introduced by #11459. Patch by Ben
Hayden.

..

.. bpo: 11577
.. date: 6818
.. nonce: 2m2urP
.. section: Tests

fix ResourceWarning triggered by improved binhex test coverage

..

.. bpo: 11509
.. date: 6817
.. nonce: _zr0dM
.. section: Tests

Significantly increase test coverage of fileinput. Patch by Denver
Coneybeare at PyCon 2011 Sprints.

..

.. bpo: 11689
.. date: 6816
.. nonce: OlYa3Q
.. section: Tests

Fix a variable scoping error in an sqlite3 test

..

.. bpo: 13786
.. date: 6815
.. nonce: 9-p3Uu
.. section: Tests

Remove unimplemented 'trace' long option from regrtest.py.

..

.. bpo: 13725
.. date: 6814
.. nonce: A4geK5
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest to recognize the documented -d flag. Patch by Erno Tukia.

..

.. bpo: 13304
.. date: 6813
.. nonce: jDDi97
.. section: Tests

Skip test case if user site-packages disabled (-s or PYTHONNOUSERSITE).
(Patch by Carl Meyer)

..

.. bpo: 5661
.. date: 6812
.. nonce: vU7MD_
.. section: Tests

Add a test for ECONNRESET/EPIPE handling to test_asyncore. Patch by Xavier
de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 13218
.. date: 6811
.. nonce: EZ3jnV
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl failures on Debian/Ubuntu.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6810
.. nonce: 4ktvta
.. section: Tests

Re-enable lib2to3's test_parser.py tests, though with an expected failure
(see issue #13125).

..

.. bpo: 12656
.. date: 6809
.. nonce: 8T6sbd
.. section: Tests

Add tests for IPv6 and Unix sockets to test_asyncore.

..

.. bpo: 6484
.. date: 6808
.. nonce: x-PPQs
.. section: Tests

Add unit tests for mailcap module (patch by Gregory Nofi)

..

.. bpo: 11651
.. date: 6807
.. nonce: NwvR8a
.. section: Tests

Improve the Makefile test targets to run more of the test suite more
quickly. The --multiprocess option is now enabled by default, reducing the
amount of time needed to run the tests. "make test" and "make quicktest" now
include some resource-intensive tests, but no longer run the test suite
twice to check for bugs in .pyc generation. Tools/scripts/run_test.py
provides an easy platform-independent way to run test suite with sensible
defaults.

..

.. bpo: 12331
.. date: 6806
.. nonce: UjcxFs
.. section: Tests

The test suite for the packaging module can now run from an installed
Python.

..

.. bpo: 12331
.. date: 6805
.. nonce: ZSPeJW
.. section: Tests

The test suite for lib2to3 can now run from an installed Python.

..

.. bpo: 12626
.. date: 6804
.. nonce: YLsif1
.. section: Tests

In regrtest, allow to filter tests using a glob filter with the ``-m`` (or
``--match``) option.  This works with all test cases using the unittest
module.  This is useful with long test suites such as test_io or
test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 12624
.. date: 6803
.. nonce: WamK2X
.. section: Tests

It is now possible to fail after the first failure when running in verbose
mode (``-v`` or ``-W``), by using the ``--failfast`` (or ``-G``) option to
regrtest.  This is useful with long test suites such as test_io or
test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 12587
.. date: 6802
.. nonce: O9yS9y
.. section: Tests

Correct faulty test file and reference in test_tokenize. (Patch by Robert
Xiao)

..

.. bpo: 12573
.. date: 6801
.. nonce: e2wPXo
.. section: Tests

Add resource checks for dangling Thread and Process objects.

..

.. bpo: 12549
.. date: 6800
.. nonce: S4urNL
.. section: Tests

Correct test_platform to not fail when OS X returns 'x86_64' as the
processor type on some Mac systems.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6799
.. nonce: EofQqr
.. section: Tests

Skip network tests when getaddrinfo() returns EAI_AGAIN, meaning a temporary
failure in name resolution.

..

.. bpo: 11812
.. date: 6798
.. nonce: jeNaCB
.. section: Tests

Solve transient socket failure to connect to 'localhost' in
test_telnetlib.py.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6797
.. nonce: cUdl39
.. section: Tests

Solved a potential deadlock in test_telnetlib.py. Related to issue #11812.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6796
.. nonce: QtTimW
.. section: Tests

Avoid failing in test_robotparser when mueblesmoraleda.com is flaky and an
overzealous DNS service (e.g. OpenDNS) redirects to a placeholder Web site.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6795
.. nonce: Vvh-2P
.. section: Tests

Avoid failing in test_urllibnet.test_bad_address when some overzealous DNS
service (e.g. OpenDNS) resolves a non-existent domain name.  The test is now
skipped instead.

..

.. bpo: 12440
.. date: 6794
.. nonce: wGLIEC
.. section: Tests

When testing whether some bits in SSLContext.options can be reset, check the
version of the OpenSSL headers Python was compiled against, rather than the
runtime version of the OpenSSL library.

..

.. bpo: 11512
.. date: 6793
.. nonce: EM5wvo
.. section: Tests

Add a test suite for the cgitb module. Patch by Robbie Clemons.

..

.. bpo: 12497
.. date: 6792
.. nonce: JuVrt4
.. section: Tests

Install test/data to prevent failures of the various codecmaps tests.

..

.. bpo: 12496
.. date: 6791
.. nonce: ZoaG3t
.. section: Tests

Install test/capath directory to prevent test_connect_capath testcase
failure in test_ssl.

..

.. bpo: 12469
.. date: 6790
.. nonce: Q76Xcy
.. section: Tests

Run wakeup and pending signal tests in a subprocess to run the test in a
fresh process with only one thread and to not change signal handling of the
parent process.

..

.. bpo: 8716
.. date: 6789
.. nonce: -qUe-z
.. section: Tests

Avoid crashes caused by Aqua Tk on OSX when attempting to run test_tk or
test_ttk_guionly under a username that is not currently logged in to the
console windowserver (as may be the case under buildbot or ssh).

..

.. bpo: 12407
.. date: 6788
.. nonce: nGH9qb
.. section: Tests

Explicitly skip test_capi.EmbeddingTest under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 12400
.. date: 6787
.. nonce: 4MhGgH
.. section: Tests

regrtest -W doesn't rerun the tests twice anymore, but captures the output
and displays it on failure instead. regrtest -v doesn't print the error
twice anymore if there is only one error.

..

.. bpo: 12141
.. date: 6786
.. nonce: stIS2p
.. section: Tests

Install copies of template C module file so that test_build_ext of
test_distutils and test_command_build_ext of test_packaging are no longer
silently skipped when run outside of a build directory.

..

.. bpo: 8746
.. date: 6785
.. nonce: I497O-
.. section: Tests

Add additional tests for os.chflags() and os.lchflags(). Patch by Garrett
Cooper.

..

.. bpo: 10736
.. date: 6784
.. nonce: PHRQ-J
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ttk test_widgets failures with Cocoa Tk 8.5.9 2.8+ on Mac OS X.
(Patch by Ronald Oussoren)

..

.. bpo: 12057
.. date: 6783
.. nonce: 7QVG6T
.. section: Tests

Add tests for ISO 2022 codecs (iso2022_jp, iso2022_jp_2, iso2022_kr).

..

.. bpo: 12096
.. date: 6782
.. nonce: KLmxPC
.. section: Tests

Fix a race condition in test_threading.test_waitfor(). Patch written by
Charles-François Natali.

..

.. bpo: 11614
.. date: 6781
.. nonce: HO7tW9
.. section: Tests

import __hello__ prints "Hello World!". Patch written by Andreas Stührk.

..

.. bpo: 5723
.. date: 6780
.. nonce: Lfg1OX
.. section: Tests

Improve json tests to be executed with and without accelerations.

..

.. bpo: 12041
.. date: 6779
.. nonce: hTvpFb
.. section: Tests

Make test_wait3 more robust.

..

.. bpo: 11873
.. date: 6778
.. nonce: VVQdC9
.. section: Tests

Change regex in test_compileall to fix occasional failures when when the
randomly generated temporary path happened to match the regex.

..

.. bpo: 11958
.. date: 6777
.. nonce: JOi0nQ
.. section: Tests

Fix FTP tests for IPv6, bind to "::1" instead of "localhost". Patch written
by Charles-Francois Natali.

..

.. bpo: 8407
.. date: 6776
.. nonce: DJQIVY
.. section: Tests

Fix tests of test_io using threads and an alarm: use pthread_sigmask() to
ensure that the SIGALRM signal is received by the main thread. (See also:
bpo-11859)

..

.. bpo: 11811
.. date: 6775
.. nonce: i7swGp
.. section: Tests

Factor out detection of IPv6 support on the current host and make it
available as ``test.support.IPV6_ENABLED``.  Patch by Charles-François
Natali.

..

.. bpo: 10914
.. date: 6774
.. nonce: YxA-mP
.. section: Tests

Add a minimal embedding test to test_capi.

..

.. bpo: 11223
.. date: 6773
.. nonce: vC2Jjc
.. section: Tests

Skip test_lock_acquire_interruption() and test_rlock_acquire_interruption()
of test_threadsignals if a thread lock is implemented using a POSIX mutex
and a POSIX condition variable. A POSIX condition variable cannot be
interrupted by a signal (e.g. on Linux, the futex system call is restarted).

..

.. bpo: 11790
.. date: 6772
.. nonce: hg_Quj
.. section: Tests

Fix sporadic failures in test_multiprocessing.WithProcessesTestCondition.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6771
.. nonce: vCw1YG
.. section: Tests

Fix possible "file already exists" error when running the tests in parallel.

..

.. bpo: 11719
.. date: 6770
.. nonce: ojamUL
.. section: Tests

Fix message about unexpected test_msilib skip on non-Windows platforms.
Patch by Nadeem Vawda.

..

.. bpo: 11727
.. date: 6769
.. nonce: UgpTZa
.. section: Tests

Add a --timeout option to regrtest: if a test takes more than TIMEOUT
seconds, dumps the traceback of all threads and exits.

..

.. bpo: 11653
.. date: 6768
.. nonce: fuE76Y
.. section: Tests

fix -W with -j in regrtest.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6767
.. nonce: M-5QhM
.. section: Tests

The email test suite now lives in the Lib/test/test_email package.  The test
harness code has also been modernized to allow use of new unittest features.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6766
.. nonce: 0YnOJ5
.. section: Tests

regrtest now discovers test packages as well as test modules.

..

.. bpo: 11577
.. date: 6765
.. nonce: dZzsdY
.. section: Tests

improve test coverage of binhex.py. Patch by Arkady Koplyarov.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6764
.. nonce: 8NI_2P
.. section: Tests

New test_crashers added to exercise the scripts in the Lib/test/crashers
directory and confirm they fail as expected

..

.. bpo: 11578
.. date: 6763
.. nonce: 7o3SVY
.. section: Tests

added test for the timeit module.  Patch by Michael Henry.

..

.. bpo: 11503
.. date: 6762
.. nonce: lhqffQ
.. section: Tests

improve test coverage of posixpath.py. Patch by Evan Dandrea.

..

.. bpo: 11505
.. date: 6761
.. nonce: lkarT_
.. section: Tests

improves test coverage of string.py, increases granularity of
string.Formatter tests. Initial patch by Alicia Arlen.

..

.. bpo: 11548
.. date: 6760
.. nonce: 5zabuP
.. section: Tests

Improve test coverage of the shutil module. Patch by Evan Dandrea.

..

.. bpo: 11554
.. date: 6759
.. nonce: JJwnjN
.. section: Tests

Reactivated test_email_codecs.

..

.. bpo: 11505
.. date: 6758
.. nonce: K__ujC
.. section: Tests

improves test coverage of string.py. Patch by Alicia Arlen

..

.. bpo: 11490
.. date: 6757
.. nonce: KEpwUL
.. section: Tests

test_subprocess.test_leaking_fds_on_error no longer gives a false positive
if the last directory in the path is inaccessible.

..

.. bpo: 11223
.. date: 6756
.. nonce: JDDjCO
.. section: Tests

Fix test_threadsignals to fail, not hang, when the non-semaphore
implementation of locks is used under POSIX.

..

.. bpo: 10911
.. date: 6755
.. nonce: Sqgxdv
.. section: Tests

Add tests on CGI with non-ASCII characters. Patch written by Pierre Quentel.

..

.. bpo: 9931
.. date: 6754
.. nonce: 0Ma8Kr
.. section: Tests

Fix hangs in GUI tests under Windows in certain conditions. Patch by
Hirokazu Yamamoto.

..

.. bpo: 10512
.. date: 6753
.. nonce: uHJ91b
.. section: Tests

Properly close sockets under test.test_cgi.

..

.. bpo: 10992
.. date: 6752
.. nonce: CnkKZh
.. section: Tests

Make tests pass under coverage.

..

.. bpo: 10826
.. date: 6751
.. nonce: fuK__-
.. section: Tests

Prevent sporadic failure in test_subprocess on Solaris due to open door
files.

..

.. bpo: 10990
.. date: 6750
.. nonce: Vhsfed
.. section: Tests

Prevent tests from clobbering a set trace function.

..

.. bpo: 13452
.. date: 6749
.. nonce: 0PXwTA
.. section: C API

PyUnicode_EncodeDecimal() doesn't support error handlers different than
"strict" anymore. The caller was unable to compute the size of the output
buffer: it depends on the error handler.

..

.. bpo: 13560
.. date: 6748
.. nonce: z0A3uk
.. section: C API

Add PyUnicode_DecodeLocale(), PyUnicode_DecodeLocaleAndSize() and
PyUnicode_EncodeLocale() functions to the C API to decode/encode from/to the
current locale encoding.

..

.. bpo: 10831
.. date: 6747
.. nonce: bBTxWl
.. section: C API

PyUnicode_FromFormat() supports %li, %lli and %zi formats.

..

.. bpo: 11246
.. date: 6746
.. nonce: QzMUnD
.. section: C API

Fix PyUnicode_FromFormat("%V") to decode the byte string from UTF-8 (with
replace error handler) instead of ISO-8859-1 (in strict mode). Patch written
by Ray Allen.

..

.. bpo: 10830
.. date: 6745
.. nonce: 40AeF8
.. section: C API

Fix PyUnicode_FromFormatV("%c") for non-BMP characters on narrow build.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6744
.. nonce: 6je57R
.. section: C API

Add PyObject_GenericGetDict and PyObject_GeneriSetDict. They are generic
implementations for the getter and setter of a ``__dict__`` descriptor of C
types.

..

.. bpo: 13727
.. date: 6743
.. nonce: ftlTbB
.. section: C API

Add 3 macros to access PyDateTime_Delta members: PyDateTime_DELTA_GET_DAYS,
PyDateTime_DELTA_GET_SECONDS, PyDateTime_DELTA_GET_MICROSECONDS.

..

.. bpo: 10542
.. date: 6742
.. nonce: 5duIOl
.. section: C API

Add 4 macros to work with surrogates: Py_UNICODE_IS_SURROGATE,
Py_UNICODE_IS_HIGH_SURROGATE, Py_UNICODE_IS_LOW_SURROGATE,
Py_UNICODE_JOIN_SURROGATES.

..

.. bpo: 12724
.. date: 6741
.. nonce: UIiFKy
.. section: C API

Add Py_RETURN_NOTIMPLEMENTED macro for returning NotImplemented.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 6740
.. nonce: kBbNiR
.. section: C API

PY_PATCHLEVEL_REVISION has been removed, since it's meaningless with
Mercurial.

..

.. bpo: 12173
.. date: 6739
.. nonce: fjaZHM
.. section: C API

The first argument of PyImport_ImportModuleLevel is now `const char *`
instead of `char *`.

..

.. bpo: 12380
.. date: 6738
.. nonce: FHSIWK
.. section: C API

PyArg_ParseTuple now accepts a bytearray for the 'c' format.

..

.. bpo: 23006
.. date: 6737
.. nonce: B64FC0
.. section: Documentation

Improve the documentation and indexing of dict.__missing__. Add an entry in
the language datamodel special methods section. Revise and index its
discussion in the stdtypes mapping/dict section.

..

.. bpo: 13989
.. date: 6736
.. nonce: G1WySN
.. section: Documentation

Document that GzipFile does not support text mode, and give a more helpful
error message when opened with an invalid mode string.

..

.. bpo: 13921
.. date: 6735
.. nonce: KGXpXP
.. section: Documentation

Undocument and clean up sqlite3.OptimizedUnicode, which is obsolete in
Python 3.x. It's now aliased to str for backwards compatibility.

..

.. bpo: 12102
.. date: 6734
.. nonce: VJSgGA
.. section: Documentation

Document that buffered files must be flushed before being used with mmap.
Patch by Steffen Daode Nurpmeso.

..

.. bpo: 8982
.. date: 6733
.. nonce: fTONNH
.. section: Documentation

Improve the documentation for the argparse Namespace object.

..

.. bpo: 9343
.. date: 6732
.. nonce: 9T-Qyz
.. section: Documentation

Document that argparse parent parsers must be configured before their
children.

..

.. bpo: 13498
.. date: 6731
.. nonce: LI0aQ4
.. section: Documentation

Clarify docs of os.makedirs()'s exist_ok argument.  Done with great native-
speaker help from R. David Murray.

..

.. bpo: 13491
.. date: 6730
.. nonce: zMFNID
.. section: Documentation

Fix many errors in sqlite3 documentation. Initial patch for #13491 by
Johannes Vogel. (See also: bpo-13995)

..

.. bpo: 13402
.. date: 6729
.. nonce: VSNrG0
.. section: Documentation

Document absoluteness of sys.executable.

..

.. bpo: 13883
.. date: 6728
.. nonce: 8qbb4D
.. section: Documentation

PYTHONCASEOK also works on OS X.

..

.. bpo: 9021
.. date: 6727
.. nonce: A0WRsT
.. section: Documentation

Add an introduction to the copy module documentation.

..

.. bpo: 6005
.. date: 6726
.. nonce: cy8Z22
.. section: Documentation

Examples in the socket library documentation use sendall, where relevant,
instead send method.

..

.. bpo: 12798
.. date: 6725
.. nonce: ggdsmY
.. section: Documentation

Updated the mimetypes documentation.

..

.. bpo: 12949
.. date: 6724
.. nonce: ef3vju
.. section: Documentation

Document the kwonlyargcount argument for the PyCode_New C API function.

..

.. bpo: 13513
.. date: 6723
.. nonce: Z6l39q
.. section: Documentation

Fix io.IOBase documentation to correctly link to the io.IOBase.readline
method instead of the readline module.

..

.. bpo: 13237
.. date: 6722
.. nonce: EVVjZK
.. section: Documentation

Reorganise subprocess documentation to emphasise convenience functions and
the most commonly needed arguments to Popen.

..

.. bpo: 13141
.. date: 6721
.. nonce: Z3gxv3
.. section: Documentation

Demonstrate recommended style for socketserver examples.

..

.. bpo: 11818
.. date: 6720
.. nonce: vB1nfN
.. section: Documentation

Fix tempfile examples for Python 3.
