.. bpo: 17328
.. date: 9478
.. nonce: 5JxFnr
.. release date: 24-Mar-2013
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible refleak in dict.setdefault.

..

.. bpo: 17223
.. date: 9477
.. nonce: eesqwQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix PyUnicode_FromUnicode() for string of 1 character outside the range
U+0000-U+10ffff.

..

.. bpo: 1692335
.. date: 9476
.. nonce: p-_w9w
.. section: Core and Builtins

Move initial args assignment to BaseException.__new__ to help pickling of
naive subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 17275
.. date: 9475
.. nonce: Aqerft
.. section: Core and Builtins

Corrected class name in init error messages of the C version of
BufferedWriter and BufferedRandom.

..

.. bpo: 7963
.. date: 9474
.. nonce: FWJtUT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed misleading error message that issued when object is called without
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 5308
.. date: 9473
.. nonce: s5uAbP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise ValueError when marshalling too large object (a sequence with size >=
2**31), instead of producing illegal marshal data.

..

.. bpo: 12983
.. date: 9472
.. nonce: drQ8D8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Bytes literals with invalid \x escape now raise a SyntaxError and a full
traceback including line number.

..

.. bpo: 17173
.. date: 9471
.. nonce: -KwwJ2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove uses of locale-dependent C functions (isalpha() etc.) in the
interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 17137
.. date: 9470
.. nonce: NI_n7A
.. section: Core and Builtins

When an Unicode string is resized, the internal wide character string (wstr)
format is now cleared.

..

.. bpo: 17043
.. date: 9469
.. nonce: 4OVhGk
.. section: Core and Builtins

The unicode-internal decoder no longer read past the end of input buffer.

..

.. bpo: 17098
.. date: 9468
.. nonce: hppfYX
.. section: Core and Builtins

All modules now have __loader__ set even if they pre-exist the bootstrapping
of importlib.

..

.. bpo: 16979
.. date: 9467
.. nonce: jTR3Oe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error handling bugs in the unicode-escape-decode decoder.

..

.. bpo: 10156
.. date: 9466
.. nonce: iEZGhY
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the interpreter's initialization phase, unicode globals are now
initialized dynamically as needed.

..

.. bpo: 16980
.. date: 9465
.. nonce: e2jDb2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix processing of escaped non-ascii bytes in the unicode-escape-decode
decoder.

..

.. bpo: 16975
.. date: 9464
.. nonce: MfvORJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix error handling bug in the escape-decode bytes decoder.

..

.. bpo: 14850
.. date: 9463
.. nonce: yScInY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now a charmap decoder treats U+FFFE as "undefined mapping" in any mapping,
not only in a string.

..

.. bpo: 16730
.. date: 9462
.. nonce: X_pIAe
.. section: Core and Builtins

importlib.machinery.FileFinder now no longers raises an exception when
trying to populate its cache and it finds out the directory is unreadable or
has turned into a file. Reported and diagnosed by David Pritchard.

..

.. bpo: 16906
.. date: 9461
.. nonce: 3kn92w
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a logic error that prevented most static strings from being cleared.

..

.. bpo: 11461
.. date: 9460
.. nonce: xwn_Zw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the incremental UTF-16 decoder. Original patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 16856
.. date: 9459
.. nonce: _alafL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segmentation fault from calling repr() on a dict with a key whose repr
raise an exception.

..

.. bpo: 16367
.. date: 9458
.. nonce: lewlCg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix FileIO.readall() on Windows for files larger than 2 GB.

..

.. bpo: 16455
.. date: 9457
.. nonce: dJYfOB
.. section: Core and Builtins

On FreeBSD and Solaris, if the locale is C, the ASCII/surrogateescape codec
is now used, instead of the locale encoding, to decode the command line
arguments. This change fixes inconsistencies with os.fsencode() and
os.fsdecode() because these operating systems announces an ASCII locale
encoding, whereas the ISO-8859-1 encoding is used in practice.

..

.. bpo: 16761
.. date: 9456
.. nonce: bZqaqq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Calling int() with base argument only now raises TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 16759
.. date: 9455
.. nonce: U0-CFS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support the full DWORD (unsigned long) range in Reg2Py when retrieving a
REG_DWORD value. This corrects functions like winreg.QueryValueEx that may
have been returning truncated values.

..

.. bpo: 14420
.. date: 9454
.. nonce: P8fmk8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support the full DWORD (unsigned long) range in Py2Reg when passed a
REG_DWORD value. Fixes OverflowError in winreg.SetValueEx.

..

.. bpo: 16597
.. date: 9453
.. nonce: z8uMEN
.. section: Core and Builtins

In buffered and text IO, call close() on the underlying stream if invoking
flush() fails.

..

.. bpo: 16722
.. date: 9452
.. nonce: HXliz2
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the bytes() constructor, try to call __bytes__ on the argument before
__index__.

..

.. bpo: 16602
.. date: 9451
.. nonce: FjnLTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a weakref's target was part of a long deallocation chain, the object
could remain reachable through its weakref even though its refcount had
dropped to zero.

..

.. bpo: 16416
.. date: 9450
.. nonce: v9EtVT
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Mac OS X, operating system data are now always encoded/decoded to/from
UTF-8/surrogateescape, instead of the locale encoding (which may be ASCII if
no locale environment variable is set), to avoid inconsistencies with
os.fsencode() and os.fsdecode() functions which are already using
UTF-8/surrogateescape.

..

.. bpo: 16588
.. date: 9449
.. nonce: YKgxOa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Silence unused-but-set warnings in Python/thread_pthread

..

.. bpo: 16546
.. date: 9448
.. nonce: LXZuCC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix: ast.YieldFrom argument is now mandatory.

..

.. bpo: 16514
.. date: 9447
.. nonce: NoxJ7R
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix regression causing a traceback when sys.path[0] is None (actually, any
non-string or non-bytes type).

..

.. bpo: 16306
.. date: 9446
.. nonce: H29SXn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix multiple error messages when unknown command line parameters where
passed to the interpreter.  Patch by Hieu Nguyen.

..

.. bpo: 16215
.. date: 9445
.. nonce: hoWMgb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential double memory free in str.replace().  Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16453
.. date: 9444
.. nonce: 0Zm9en
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix equality testing of dead weakref objects.

..

.. bpo: 9535
.. date: 9443
.. nonce: hkixPD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix pending signals that have been received but not yet handled by Python to
not persist after os.fork() in the child process.

..

.. bpo: 15001
.. date: 9442
.. nonce: oD3gtX
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix segfault on "del sys.modules['__main__']". Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 8271
.. date: 9441
.. nonce: 1qiQia
.. section: Core and Builtins

the utf-8 decoder now outputs the correct number of U+FFFD characters when
used with the 'replace' error handler on invalid utf-8 sequences.  Patch by
Serhiy Storchaka, tests by Ezio Melotti.

..

.. bpo: 5765
.. date: 9440
.. nonce: YFFijP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Apply a hard recursion limit in the compiler instead of blowing the stack
and segfaulting. Initial patch by Andrea Griffini.

..

.. bpo: 16402
.. date: 9439
.. nonce: j73Ooz
.. section: Core and Builtins

When slicing a range, fix shadowing of exceptions from __index__.

..

.. bpo: 16336
.. date: 9438
.. nonce: JaupVb
.. section: Core and Builtins

fix input checking in the surrogatepass error handler. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 8401
.. date: 9437
.. nonce: TslRZr
.. section: Core and Builtins

assigning an int to a bytearray slice (e.g. b[3:4] = 5) now raises an error.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9436
.. nonce: iqyUxO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfaults on setting __qualname__ on builtin types and attempting to
delete it on any type.

..

.. bpo: 16345
.. date: 9435
.. nonce: azvPpP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an infinite loop when ``fromkeys`` on a dict subclass received a
nonempty dict from the constructor.

..

.. bpo: 16271
.. date: 9434
.. nonce: ALsJdN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix strange bugs that resulted from __qualname__ appearing in a class's
__dict__ and on type.

..

.. bpo: 6074
.. date: 9433
.. nonce: CXlveH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure cached bytecode files can always be updated by the user that created
them, even when the source file is read-only.

..

.. bpo: 14783
.. date: 9432
.. nonce: bv7z1_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve int() docstring and switch docstrings for str(), range(), and
slice() to use multi-line signatures.

..

.. bpo: 16160
.. date: 9431
.. nonce: NKBYGr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Subclass support now works for types.SimpleNamespace.

..

.. bpo: 15379
.. date: 9430
.. nonce: Ix2NTb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix passing of non-BMP characters as integers for the charmap decoder
(already working as unicode strings).  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15144
.. date: 9429
.. nonce: ENBWTp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible integer overflow when handling pointers as integer values, by
using `Py_uintptr_t` instead of `size_t`.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15965
.. date: 9428
.. nonce: kbbwZh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Explicitly cast `AT_FDCWD` as (int).  Required on Solaris 10 (which defines
`AT_FDCWD` as ``0xffd19553``), harmless on other platforms.

..

.. bpo: 15839
.. date: 9427
.. nonce: upi9Zr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Convert SystemErrors in `super()` to RuntimeErrors.

..

.. bpo: 15846
.. date: 9426
.. nonce: fkKoxl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix SystemError which happened when using `ast.parse()` in an exception
handler on code with syntax errors.

..

.. bpo: 15801
.. date: 9425
.. nonce: gpcQV3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make sure mappings passed to '%' formatting are actually subscriptable.

..

.. bpo: 15111
.. date: 9424
.. nonce: JBWln5
.. section: Core and Builtins

__import__ should let ImportError propagate when a module that is imported
as a side-effect of using fromlist tries to import a module that cannot be
found.

..

.. bpo: 17540
.. date: 9423
.. nonce: tkRBny
.. section: Library

Added style to formatter configuration by dict.

..

.. bpo: 17536
.. date: 9422
.. nonce: PLE2RC
.. section: Library

Add to webbrowser's browser list: www-browser, x-www-browser, iceweasel,
iceape.

..

.. bpo: 17488
.. date: 9421
.. nonce: ODub-T
.. section: Library

Change the subprocess.Popen bufsize parameter default value from unbuffered
(0) to buffering (-1) to match the behavior existing code expects and match
the behavior of the subprocess module in Python 2 to avoid introducing hard
to track down bugs.

..

.. bpo: 17521
.. date: 9420
.. nonce: rDGKe7
.. section: Library

Corrected non-enabling of logger following two calls to fileConfig().

..

.. bpo: 17508
.. date: 9419
.. nonce: sO6qmY
.. section: Library

Corrected MemoryHandler configuration in dictConfig() where the target
handler wasn't configured first.

..

.. bpo: 17209
.. date: 9418
.. nonce: YLGLde
.. section: Library

curses.window.get_wch() now handles correctly KeyboardInterrupt (CTRL+c).

..

.. bpo: 5713
.. date: 9417
.. nonce: SuN3vQ
.. section: Library

smtplib now handles 421 (closing connection) error codes when sending mail
by closing the socket and reporting the 421 error code via the exception
appropriate to the command that received the error response.

..

.. bpo: 17192
.. date: 9416
.. nonce: U0oKFo
.. section: Library

Update the ctypes module's libffi to v3.0.13.  This specifically addresses a
stack misalignment issue on x86 and issues on some more recent platforms.

..

.. bpo: 8862
.. date: 9415
.. nonce: WkppFP
.. section: Library

Fixed curses cleanup when getkey is interrputed by a signal.

..

.. bpo: 17443
.. date: 9414
.. nonce: _ARDbV
.. section: Library

imaplib.IMAP4_stream was using the default unbuffered IO in subprocess, but
the imap code assumes buffered IO.  In Python2 this worked by accident.
IMAP4_stream now explicitly uses buffered IO.

..

.. bpo: 17476
.. date: 9413
.. nonce: Vs3Ky0
.. section: Library

Fixed regression relative to Python2 in undocumented pydoc 'allmethods'; it
was missing unbound methods on the class.

..

.. bpo: 16880
.. date: 9412
.. nonce: VYBbI-
.. section: Library

Do not assume _imp.load_dynamic() is defined in the imp module.

..

.. bpo: 16389
.. date: 9411
.. nonce: uQ4z93
.. section: Library

Fixed a performance regression relative to Python 3.1 in the caching of
compiled regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 17431
.. date: 9410
.. nonce: nID-Rk
.. section: Library

Fix missing import of BytesFeedParser in email.parser.

..

.. bpo: 1285086
.. date: 9409
.. nonce: RN9orX
.. section: Library

Get rid of the refcounting hack and speed up urllib.parse.unquote() and
urllib.parse.unquote_to_bytes().

..

.. bpo: 17368
.. date: 9408
.. nonce: y8QiJd
.. section: Library

Fix an off-by-one error in the Python JSON decoder that caused a failure
while decoding empty object literals when object_pairs_hook was specified.

..

.. bpo: 14645
.. date: 9407
.. nonce: FevIjz
.. section: Library

The email generator classes now produce output using the specified linesep
throughout.  Previously if the prolog, epilog, or body were stored with a
different linesep, that linesep was used.  This fix corrects an RFC non-
compliance issue with smtplib.send_message.

..

.. bpo: 17278
.. date: 9406
.. nonce: pOF4An
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in heapq.heappush() and heapq.heappop() when the list is being
resized concurrently.

..

.. bpo: 16962
.. date: 9405
.. nonce: 4mCLOO
.. section: Library

Use getdents64 instead of the obsolete getdents syscall in the subprocess
module on Linux.

..

.. bpo: 17018
.. date: 9404
.. nonce: l8_sa8
.. section: Library

Make Process.join() retry if os.waitpid() fails with EINTR.

..

.. bpo: 17223
.. date: 9403
.. nonce: gzcSyh
.. section: Library

array module: Fix a crasher when converting an array containing invalid
characters (outside range [U+0000; U+10ffff]) to Unicode: repr(array),
str(array) and array.tounicode(). Patch written by Manuel Jacob.

..

.. bpo: 14720
.. date: 9402
.. nonce: rjT0OJ
.. section: Library

sqlite3: Convert datetime microseconds correctly. Patch by Lowe Thiderman.

..

.. bpo: 17225
.. date: 9401
.. nonce: Z396fN
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now counts columns in the first line starting with 1, as in
other lines.

..

.. bpo: 13700
.. date: 9400
.. nonce: sfJ2nZ
.. section: Library

Fix byte/string handling in imaplib authentication when an authobject is
specified.

..

.. bpo: 13153
.. date: 9399
.. nonce: DW27xH
.. section: Library

Tkinter functions now raise TclError instead of ValueError when a string
argument contains non-BMP character.

..

.. bpo: 9669
.. date: 9398
.. nonce: Td9alB
.. section: Library

Protect re against infinite loops on zero-width matching in non-greedy
repeat.  Patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 13169
.. date: 9397
.. nonce: txDMgH
.. section: Library

The maximal repetition number in a regular expression has been increased
from 65534 to 2147483647 (on 32-bit platform) or 4294967294 (on 64-bit).

..

.. bpo: 17143
.. date: 9396
.. nonce: HLnFxv
.. section: Library

Fix a missing import in the trace module.  Initial patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 16743
.. date: 9395
.. nonce: 7vwfDN
.. section: Library

Fix mmap overflow check on 32 bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16800
.. date: 9394
.. nonce: HxSo58
.. section: Library

tempfile.gettempdir() no longer left temporary files when the disk is full.
Original patch by Amir Szekely.

..

.. bpo: 16564
.. date: 9393
.. nonce: KBvsbB
.. section: Library

Fixed regression relative to Python2 in the operation of
email.encoders.encode_7or8bit when used with binary data.

..

.. bpo: 17052
.. date: 9392
.. nonce: TEWdzQ
.. section: Library

unittest discovery should use self.testLoader.

..

.. bpo: 4591
.. date: 9391
.. nonce: 9wJlD8
.. section: Library

Uid and gid values larger than 2**31 are supported now.

..

.. bpo: 17141
.. date: 9390
.. nonce: pXFICp
.. section: Library

random.vonmisesvariate() no more hangs for large kappas.

..

.. bpo: 17149
.. date: 9389
.. nonce: _hUd7T
.. section: Library

Fix random.vonmisesvariate to always return results in [0, 2*math.pi].

..

.. bpo: 1470548
.. date: 9388
.. nonce: vqnyer
.. section: Library

XMLGenerator now works with binary output streams.

..

.. bpo: 6975
.. date: 9387
.. nonce: 4GoPXW
.. section: Library

os.path.realpath() now correctly resolves multiple nested symlinks on POSIX
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 16564
.. date: 9386
.. nonce: 5RdAXG
.. section: Library

Fixed regression relative to Python2 in the operation of
email.encoders.encode_noop when used with binary data.

..

.. bpo: 10355
.. date: 9385
.. nonce: s_RAWf
.. section: Library

The mode, name, encoding and newlines properties now work on
SpooledTemporaryFile objects even when they have not yet rolled over.
Obsolete method xreadline (which has never worked in Python 3) has been
removed.

..

.. bpo: 16686
.. date: 9384
.. nonce: zT_bpe
.. section: Library

Fixed a lot of bugs in audioop module.  Fixed crashes in avgpp(), maxpp()
and ratecv().  Fixed an integer overflow in add(), bias(), and ratecv().
reverse(), lin2lin() and ratecv() no more lose precision for 32-bit samples.
max() and rms() no more returns a negative result and various other
functions now work correctly with 32-bit sample -0x80000000.

..

.. bpo: 17073
.. date: 9383
.. nonce: wlCar1
.. section: Library

Fix some integer overflows in sqlite3 module.

..

.. bpo: 16723
.. date: 9382
.. nonce: q1Cw-s
.. section: Library

httplib.HTTPResponse no longer marked closed when the connection is
automatically closed.

..

.. bpo: 16948
.. date: 9381
.. nonce: 8mm-53
.. section: Library

Fix quoted printable body encoding for non-latin1 character sets in the
email package.

..

.. bpo: 16811
.. date: 9380
.. nonce: rlH6y6
.. section: Library

Fix folding of headers with no value in the provisional email policies.

..

.. bpo: 17132
.. date: 9379
.. nonce: ebpN0J
.. section: Library

Update symbol for "yield from" grammar changes.

..

.. bpo: 17076
.. date: 9378
.. nonce: 5YxEdX
.. section: Library

Make copying of xattrs more permissive of missing FS support. Patch by
Thomas Wouters.

..

.. bpo: 17089
.. date: 9377
.. nonce: WNCTnJ
.. section: Library

Expat parser now correctly works with string input not only when an internal
XML encoding is UTF-8 or US-ASCII.  It now accepts bytes and strings larger
than 2 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 6083
.. date: 9376
.. nonce: 5_NDqv
.. section: Library

Fix multiple segmentation faults occured when PyArg_ParseTuple parses nested
mutating sequence.

..

.. bpo: 5289
.. date: 9375
.. nonce: 4azz2m
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes.util.find_library on Solaris.

..

.. bpo: 17106
.. date: 9374
.. nonce: -2_cbV
.. section: Library

Fix a segmentation fault in io.TextIOWrapper when an underlying stream or a
decoder produces data of an unexpected type (i.e. when io.TextIOWrapper
initialized with text stream or use bytes-to-bytes codec).

..

.. bpo: 15633
.. date: 9373
.. nonce: t407yZ
.. section: Library

httplib.HTTPResponse is now mark closed when the server sends less than the
advertised Content-Length.

..

.. bpo: 12268
.. date: 9372
.. nonce: sIHfGM
.. section: Library

The io module file object write methods no longer abort early when one of
its write system calls is interrupted (EINTR).

..

.. bpo: 6972
.. date: 9371
.. nonce: e2Lq4T
.. section: Library

The zipfile module no longer overwrites files outside of its destination
path when extracting malicious zip files.

..

.. bpo: 4844
.. date: 9370
.. nonce: ascNW4
.. section: Library

ZipFile now raises BadZipFile when opens a ZIP file with an incomplete "End
of Central Directory" record.  Original patch by Guilherme Polo and Alan
McIntyre.

..

.. bpo: 17071
.. date: 9369
.. nonce: kRQAey
.. section: Library

Signature.bind() now works when one of the keyword arguments is named
``self``.

..

.. bpo: 12004
.. date: 9368
.. nonce: SAEl1I
.. section: Library

Fix an internal error in PyZipFile when writing an invalid Python file.
Patch by Ben Morgan.

..

.. bpo: 1602133
.. date: 9367
.. nonce: lYqpUo
.. section: Library

on Mac OS X a shared library build (``--enable-shared``) now fills the
``os.environ`` variable correctly.

..

.. bpo: 15505
.. date: 9366
.. nonce: -pH9Mh
.. section: Library

`unittest.installHandler` no longer assumes SIGINT handler is set to a
callable object.

..

.. bpo: 13454
.. date: 9365
.. nonce: 81rUI-
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when deleting an iterator created by itertools.tee() if all
other iterators were very advanced before.

..

.. bpo: 12411
.. date: 9364
.. nonce: cw1MdL
.. section: Library

Fix to cgi.parse_multipart to correctly use bytes boundaries and bytes data.
Patch by Jonas Wagner.

..

.. bpo: 16957
.. date: 9363
.. nonce: ne-gBj
.. section: Library

shutil.which() no longer searches a bare file name in the current directory
on Unix and no longer searches a relative file path with a directory part in
PATH directories.  Patch by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 16993
.. date: 9362
.. nonce: L3OmWx
.. section: Library

shutil.which() now preserves the case of the path and extension on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16992
.. date: 9361
.. nonce: s_RXIM
.. section: Library

On Windows in signal.set_wakeup_fd, validate the file descriptor argument.

..

.. bpo: 16422
.. date: 9360
.. nonce: SNwB1o
.. section: Library

For compatibility with the Python version, the C version of decimal now uses
strings instead of integers for rounding mode constants.

..

.. bpo: 15861
.. date: 9359
.. nonce: gGkxCM
.. section: Library

tkinter now correctly works with lists and tuples containing strings with
whitespaces, backslashes or unbalanced braces.

..

.. bpo: 10527
.. date: 9358
.. nonce: EuNKip
.. section: Library

Use poll() instead of select() for multiprocessing pipes.

..

.. bpo: 9720
.. date: 9357
.. nonce: XPXDks
.. section: Library

zipfile now writes correct local headers for files larger than 4 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 16955
.. date: 9356
.. nonce: VD_jpc
.. section: Library

Fix the poll() method for multiprocessing's socket connections on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9355
.. nonce: PoQ__t
.. section: Library

SSLContext.load_dh_params() now properly closes the input file.

..

.. bpo: 16900
.. date: 9354
.. nonce: oyyCUi
.. section: Library

Issue a ResourceWarning when an ssl socket is left unclosed.

..

.. bpo: 13899
.. date: 9353
.. nonce: yz3hXA
.. section: Library

\A, \Z, and \B now correctly match the A, Z, and B literals when used inside
character classes (e.g. '[\A]').  Patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 15545
.. date: 9352
.. nonce: FCBNNV
.. section: Library

Fix regression in sqlite3's iterdump method where it was failing if the
connection used a row factory (such as sqlite3.Row) that produced unsortable
objects. (Regression was introduced by fix for 9750).

..

.. bpo: 15972
.. date: 9351
.. nonce: G3_6id
.. section: Library

Fix error messages when os functions expecting a file name or file
descriptor receive the incorrect type.

..

.. bpo: 16828
.. date: 9350
.. nonce: uSGRTZ
.. section: Library

Fix error incorrectly raised by bz2.compress(b'') and
bz2.BZ2Compressor.compress(b''). Initial patch by Martin Packman.

..

.. bpo: 16541
.. date: 9349
.. nonce: rfIhAb
.. section: Library

tk_setPalette() now works with keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 16820
.. date: 9348
.. nonce: e27ceV
.. section: Library

In configparser, `parser.popitem()` no longer raises ValueError. This makes
`parser.clean()` work correctly.

..

.. bpo: 16820
.. date: 9347
.. nonce: eSaGa4
.. section: Library

In configparser, ``parser['section'] = {}`` now preserves section order
within the parser. This makes `parser.update()` preserve section order as
well.

..

.. bpo: 16820
.. date: 9346
.. nonce: yk3gzb
.. section: Library

In configparser, ``parser['DEFAULT'] = {}`` now correctly clears previous
values stored in the default section. Same goes for
``parser.update({'DEFAULT': {}})``.

..

.. bpo: 9586
.. date: 9345
.. nonce: 9tuKgR
.. section: Library

Redefine SEM_FAILED on MacOSX to keep compiler happy.

..

.. bpo: 10527
.. date: 9344
.. nonce: 7btVvN
.. section: Library

make multiprocessing use poll() instead of select() if available.

..

.. bpo: 16688
.. date: 9343
.. nonce: V4uNMo
.. section: Library

Now regexes contained backreferences correctly work with non-ASCII strings.
Patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 16485
.. date: 9342
.. nonce: aUJyTZ
.. section: Library

Now file descriptors are closed if file header patching failed on closing an
aifc file.

..

.. bpo: 16165
.. date: 9341
.. nonce: QuZOIy
.. section: Library

sched.scheduler.run() no longer blocks a scheduler for other threads.

..

.. bpo: 16641
.. date: 9340
.. nonce: JYpAhs
.. section: Library

Default values of sched.scheduler.enter() are no longer modifiable.

..

.. bpo: 16618
.. date: 9339
.. nonce: lo3BQu
.. section: Library

Make glob.glob match consistently across strings and bytes regarding leading
dots.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16713
.. date: 9338
.. nonce: Mq84Hq
.. section: Library

Parsing of 'tel' urls using urlparse separates params from path.

..

.. bpo: 16443
.. date: 9337
.. nonce: SnGosi
.. section: Library

Add docstrings to regular expression match objects. Patch by Anton Kasyanov.

..

.. bpo: 15701
.. date: 9336
.. nonce: rAh1Sy
.. section: Library

Fix HTTPError info method call to return the headers information.

..

.. bpo: 16752
.. date: 9335
.. nonce: gIWkHK
.. section: Library

Add a missing import to modulefinder. Patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 16646
.. date: 9334
.. nonce: Tc3vsq
.. section: Library

ftplib.FTP.makeport() might lose socket error details. (patch by Serhiy
Storchaka)

..

.. bpo: 16626
.. date: 9333
.. nonce: P9xKcu
.. section: Library

Fix infinite recursion in glob.glob() on Windows when the pattern contains a
wildcard in the drive or UNC path.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15783
.. date: 9332
.. nonce: y8LbED
.. section: Library

Except for the number methods, the C version of decimal now supports all
None default values present in decimal.py. These values were largely
undocumented.

..

.. bpo: 16298
.. date: 9331
.. nonce: kN3o52
.. section: Library

In HTTPResponse.read(), close the socket when there is no Content-Length and
the incoming stream is finished.  Patch by Eran Rundstein.

..

.. bpo: 15872
.. date: 9330
.. nonce: hPj0NT
.. section: Library

Fix 3.3 regression introduced by the new fd-based shutil.rmtree that caused
it to not ignore certain errors when ignore_errors was set. Patch by
Alessandro Moura and Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16248
.. date: 9329
.. nonce: yOopnt
.. section: Library

Disable code execution from the user's home directory by tkinter when the -E
flag is passed to Python.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16628
.. date: 9328
.. nonce: qnWML3
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in ctypes.resize().

..

.. bpo: 13614
.. date: 9327
.. nonce: buqA2j
.. section: Library

Fix setup.py register failure with invalid rst in description. Patch by
Julien Courteau and Pierre Paul Lefebvre.

..

.. bpo: 13512
.. date: 9326
.. nonce: KW8Du9
.. section: Library

Create ~/.pypirc securely (CVE-2011-4944).  Initial patch by Philip Jenvey,
tested by Mageia and Debian.

..

.. bpo: 7719
.. date: 9325
.. nonce: O-kdp6
.. section: Library

Make distutils ignore ``.nfs*`` files instead of choking later on.  Initial
patch by SilentGhost and Jeff Ramnani.

..

.. bpo: 13120
.. date: 9324
.. nonce: XjAzio
.. section: Library

Allow to call pdb.set_trace() from thread. Patch by Ilya Sandler.

..

.. bpo: 16585
.. date: 9323
.. nonce: f_MHWg
.. section: Library

Make CJK encoders support error handlers that return bytes per PEP 383.

..

.. bpo: 10182
.. date: 9322
.. nonce: 0nH79H
.. section: Library

The re module doesn't truncate indices to 32 bits anymore. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16573
.. date: 9321
.. nonce: kKjx72
.. section: Library

In 2to3, treat enumerate() like a consuming call, so superfluous list()
calls aren't added to filter(), map(), and zip() which are directly passed
enumerate().

..

.. bpo: 12848
.. date: 9320
.. nonce: gGAbLz
.. section: Library

The pure Python pickle implementation now treats object lengths as unsigned
32-bit integers, like the C implementation does. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16408
.. date: 9319
.. nonce: iqzks4
.. section: Library

Fix file descriptors not being closed in error conditions in the zipfile
module.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16481
.. date: 9318
.. nonce: TsOri8
.. section: Library

multiprocessing no longer leaks process handles on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16140
.. date: 9317
.. nonce: lszQfR
.. section: Library

The subprocess module no longer double closes its child subprocess.PIPE
parent file descriptors on child error prior to exec().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9316
.. nonce: G2vxaZ
.. section: Library

Remove a bare print to stdout from the subprocess module that could have
happened if the child process wrote garbage to its pre-exec error pipe.

..

.. bpo: 16327
.. date: 9315
.. nonce: uVAHv3
.. section: Library

The subprocess module no longer leaks file descriptors used for
stdin/stdout/stderr pipes to the child when fork() fails.

..

.. bpo: 14396
.. date: 9314
.. nonce: aUgPuV
.. section: Library

Handle the odd rare case of waitpid returning 0 when not expected in
subprocess.Popen.wait().

..

.. bpo: 16411
.. date: 9313
.. nonce: 9Mn07O
.. section: Library

Fix a bug where zlib.decompressobj().flush() might try to access previously-
freed memory. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16357
.. date: 9312
.. nonce: JSAbxU
.. section: Library

fix calling accept() on a SSLSocket created through
SSLContext.wrap_socket().  Original patch by Jeff McNeil.

..

.. bpo: 16409
.. date: 9311
.. nonce: Q4-W9i
.. section: Library

The reporthook callback made by the legacy urllib.request.urlretrieve API
now properly supplies a constant non-zero block_size as it did in Python 3.2
and 2.7.  This matches the behavior of urllib.request.URLopener.retrieve.

..

.. bpo: 16431
.. date: 9310
.. nonce: e4cPCA
.. section: Library

Use the type information when constructing a Decimal subtype from a Decimal
argument.

..

.. bpo: 16350
.. date: 9309
.. nonce: b77tF6
.. section: Library

zlib.decompressobj().decompress() now accumulates data from successive calls
after EOF in unused_data, instead of only saving the argument to the last
call. decompressobj().flush() now correctly sets unused_data and
unconsumed_tail. A bug in the handling of MemoryError when setting the
unconsumed_tail attribute has also been fixed. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 12759
.. date: 9308
.. nonce: c7p8aw
.. section: Library

sre_parse now raises a proper error when the name of the group is missing.
Initial patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16152
.. date: 9307
.. nonce: Lypvsp
.. section: Library

fix tokenize to ignore whitespace at the end of the code when no newline is
found.  Patch by Ned Batchelder.

..

.. bpo: 16230
.. date: 9306
.. nonce: DC1cQ_
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in select.select() when one the lists changes size while
iterated on.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16228
.. date: 9305
.. nonce: zsna-8
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the json module where a list changes size while it is being
encoded.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 14897
.. date: 9304
.. nonce: OGbALj
.. section: Library

Enhance error messages of struct.pack and struct.pack_into. Patch by Matti
Mäki.

..

.. bpo: 12890
.. date: 9303
.. nonce: kDaDxa
.. section: Library

cgitb no longer prints spurious <p> tags in text mode when the logdir option
is specified.

..

.. bpo: 16307
.. date: 9302
.. nonce: a50VwB
.. section: Library

Fix multiprocessing.Pool.map_async not calling its callbacks. Patch by Janne
Karila.

..

.. bpo: 16250
.. date: 9301
.. nonce: GeMn07
.. section: Library

Fix URLError invocation with proper args.

..

.. bpo: 16116
.. date: 9300
.. nonce: vgGtQF
.. section: Library

Fix include and library paths to be correct when building C extensions in
venvs.

..

.. bpo: 16245
.. date: 9299
.. nonce: kJSC-a
.. section: Library

Fix the value of a few entities in html.entities.html5.

..

.. bpo: 14398
.. date: 9298
.. nonce: jPT4ME
.. section: Library

Fix size truncation and overflow bugs in the bz2 module.

..

.. bpo: 16220
.. date: 9297
.. nonce: KAtvbg
.. section: Library

wsgiref now always calls close() on an iterable response. Patch by Brent
Tubbs.

..

.. bpo: 16270
.. date: 9296
.. nonce: O-WZPm
.. section: Library

urllib may hang when used for retrieving files via FTP by using a context
manager.  Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 16461
.. date: 9295
.. nonce: 4XLB7L
.. section: Library

Wave library should be able to deal with 4GB wav files, and sample rate of
44100 Hz.

..

.. bpo: 16176
.. date: 9294
.. nonce: iZz-x5
.. section: Library

Properly identify Windows 8 via platform.platform()

..

.. bpo: 16114
.. date: 9293
.. nonce: 99pl4N
.. section: Library

The subprocess module no longer provides a misleading error message stating
that args[0] did not exist when either the cwd or executable keyword
arguments specified a path that did not exist.

..

.. bpo: 16169
.. date: 9292
.. nonce: zjnL7m
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes.WinError()'s confusion between errno and winerror.

..

.. bpo: 16076
.. date: 9291
.. nonce: bPCuXX
.. section: Library

Made _elementtree.Element pickleable in a way that is compatible with the
Python Element. Pickling/unpickling of xml.etree.ElementTree.Element works
again - this was a temporary regression from 3.2 where the by-default
imported _elementtree had no pickling capability.

..

.. bpo: 16089
.. date: 9290
.. nonce: L9jCK7
.. section: Library

Allow ElementTree.TreeBuilder to work again with a non-Element
element_factory (fixes a regression in SimpleTAL).

..

.. bpo: 16913
.. date: 9289
.. nonce: P07XAS
.. section: Library

Fix Element.itertext()'s handling of text with XML entities.,

..

.. bpo: 16034
.. date: 9288
.. nonce: E_ZhP2
.. section: Library

Fix performance regressions in the new `bz2.BZ2File` implementation.
Initial patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16112
.. date: 9287
.. nonce: 7UQthq
.. section: Library

platform.architecture does not correctly escape argument to /usr/bin/file.
Patch by David Benjamin.

..

.. bpo: 15756
.. date: 9286
.. nonce: WAeC4R
.. section: Library

`subprocess.poll()` now properly handles `errno.ECHILD` to return a
returncode of 0 when the child has already exited or cannot be waited on.

..

.. bpo: 15323
.. date: 9285
.. nonce: L4bD_6
.. section: Library

Improve failure message of `Mock.assert_called_once_with()`.

..

.. bpo: 16064
.. date: 9284
.. nonce: oSOZ0F
.. section: Library

``unittest -m`` claims executable is "python", not "python3".

..

.. bpo: 12376
.. date: 9283
.. nonce: XQz0f2
.. section: Library

Pass on parameters in `TextTestResult.__init__()` super call.

..

.. bpo: 15222
.. date: 9282
.. nonce: 1KFZ58
.. section: Library

Insert blank line after each message in mbox mailboxes.

..

.. bpo: 16013
.. date: 9281
.. nonce: QtdOeT
.. section: Library

Fix `csv.Reader` parsing issue with ending quote characters. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15421
.. date: 9280
.. nonce: bS-Hq5
.. section: Library

Fix an OverflowError in `Calendar.itermonthdates()` after
`datetime.MAXYEAR`.  Patch by Cédric Krier.

..

.. bpo: 15970
.. date: 9279
.. nonce: -hD9Ha
.. section: Library

`xml.etree.ElementTree` now serializes correctly the empty HTML elements
'meta' and 'param'.

..

.. bpo: 15842
.. date: 9278
.. nonce: _Kzj4o
.. section: Library

The `SocketIO.{readable,writable,seekable}` methods now raise ValueError
when the file-like object is closed.  Patch by Alessandro Moura.

..

.. bpo: 15876
.. date: 9277
.. nonce: hMWNMn
.. section: Library

Fix a refleak in the `curses` module: window.encoding.

..

.. bpo: 15881
.. date: 9276
.. nonce: 0CCbVo
.. section: Library

Fix `atexit` hook in `multiprocessing`.  Original patch by Chris McDonough.

..

.. bpo: 15841
.. date: 9275
.. nonce: UVh8eH
.. section: Library

The readable(), writable() and seekable() methods of `io.BytesIO` and
`io.StringIO` objects now raise ValueError when the object has been closed.
Patch by Alessandro Moura.

..

.. bpo: 15447
.. date: 9274
.. nonce: bdNIb1
.. section: Library

Use `subprocess.DEVNULL` in webbrowser, instead of opening `os.devnull`
explicitly and leaving it open.

..

.. bpo: 15509
.. date: 9273
.. nonce: q1hQFS
.. section: Library

`webbrowser.UnixBrowser` no longer passes empty arguments to Popen when
``%action`` substitutions produce empty strings.

..

.. bpo: 12776
.. date: 9272
.. nonce: hfj3H3
.. section: Library

Call `argparse` type function (specified by add_argument) only once.
Before, the type function was called twice in the case where the default was
specified and the argument was given as well.  This was especially
problematic for the FileType type, as a default file would always be opened,
even if a file argument was specified on the command line. (See also:
bpo-11839)

..

.. bpo: 15906
.. date: 9271
.. nonce: tmHdsD
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in `argparse` caused by the preceding change, when
``action='append'``, ``type='str'`` and ``default=[]``.

..

.. bpo: 17114
.. date: 9270
.. nonce: vKMHae
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now uses non-strict config parser.

..

.. bpo: 9290
.. date: 9269
.. nonce: Msbacw
.. section: IDLE

In IDLE the sys.std* streams now implement io.TextIOBase interface and
support all mandatory methods and properties.

..

.. bpo: 16829
.. date: 9268
.. nonce: u44Uel
.. section: IDLE

IDLE printing no longer fails if there are spaces or other special
characters in the file path.

..

.. bpo: 16491
.. date: 9267
.. nonce: xeXwAA
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now prints chained exception tracebacks.

..

.. bpo: 16819
.. date: 9266
.. nonce: xEntNh
.. section: IDLE

IDLE method completion now correctly works for bytes literals.

..

.. bpo: 16504
.. date: 9265
.. nonce: othtN_
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now catches SyntaxErrors raised by tokenizer. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 16511
.. date: 9264
.. nonce: yFDlh7
.. section: IDLE

Use default IDLE width and height if config param is not valid. Patch Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 1207589
.. date: 9263
.. nonce: N3NExO
.. section: IDLE

Add Cut/Copy/Paste items to IDLE right click Context Menu Patch by Todd
Rovito.

..

.. bpo: 17448
.. date: 9262
.. nonce: E2kxQS
.. section: Tests

test_sax now skips if there are no xml parsers available instead of raising
an ImportError.

..

.. bpo: 11420
.. date: 9261
.. nonce: J5oaxT
.. section: Tests

make test suite pass with -B/DONTWRITEBYTECODE set. Initial patch by Thomas
Wouters.

..

.. bpo: 10652
.. date: 9260
.. nonce: hWhWD_
.. section: Tests

make tcl/tk tests run after __all__ test, patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 11963
.. date: 9259
.. nonce: _g8d_g
.. section: Tests

remove human verification from test_parser and test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 11732
.. date: 9258
.. nonce: c8z-Dq
.. section: Tests

add a new suppress_crash_popup() context manager to test.support that
disables crash popups on Windows and use it in test_faulthandler and
test_capi.

..

.. bpo: 13898
.. date: 9257
.. nonce: HeB5Ep
.. section: Tests

test_ssl no longer prints a spurious stack trace on Ubuntu.

..

.. bpo: 17249
.. date: 9256
.. nonce: wGvw7G
.. section: Tests

convert a test in test_capi to use unittest and reap threads.

..

.. bpo: 17041
.. date: 9255
.. nonce: QNrBhm
.. section: Tests

Fix testing when Python is configured with the --without-doc-strings.

..

.. bpo: 16923
.. date: 9254
.. nonce: gK2bSh
.. section: Tests

Fix ResourceWarnings in test_ssl.

..

.. bpo: 15539
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: a1_G0Q
.. section: Tests

Added regression tests for Tools/scripts/pindent.py.

..

.. bpo: 17479
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: e2vj2q
.. section: Tests

test_io now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17066
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: 6axkCO
.. section: Tests

test_robotparser now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary
Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17334
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: hOeO8N
.. section: Tests

test_index now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17333
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: wKzaNc
.. section: Tests

test_imaplib now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17082
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: B-o8aq
.. section: Tests

test_dbm* now work with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17079
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: Uz1Ysh
.. section: Tests

test_ctypes now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17304
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: HUHsX_
.. section: Tests

test_hash now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17303
.. date: 9245
.. nonce: TGUnon
.. section: Tests

test_future* now work with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17163
.. date: 9244
.. nonce: RtwHDs
.. section: Tests

test_file now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16925
.. date: 9243
.. nonce: SMQSIJ
.. section: Tests

test_configparser now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary
Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16918
.. date: 9242
.. nonce: Dw6bfJ
.. section: Tests

test_codecs now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16919
.. date: 9241
.. nonce: RD7mec
.. section: Tests

test_crypt now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16910
.. date: 9240
.. nonce: awigr8
.. section: Tests

test_bytes, test_unicode, and test_userstring now work with unittest test
discovery.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16905
.. date: 9239
.. nonce: 8SuIFn
.. section: Tests

test_warnings now works with unittest test discovery. Initial patch by
Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 16898
.. date: 9238
.. nonce: 1pNH58
.. section: Tests

test_bufio now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16888
.. date: 9237
.. nonce: yWvMUM
.. section: Tests

test_array now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16896
.. date: 9236
.. nonce: 8uLSFW
.. section: Tests

test_asyncore now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16897
.. date: 9235
.. nonce: aEwG-R
.. section: Tests

test_bisect now works with unittest test discovery. Initial patch by Zachary
Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16852
.. date: 9234
.. nonce: z4zef9
.. section: Tests

test_genericpath, test_posixpath, test_ntpath, and test_macpath now work
with unittest test discovery.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 16748
.. date: 9233
.. nonce: 74HpRw
.. section: Tests

test_heapq now works with unittest test discovery.

..

.. bpo: 15324
.. date: 9232
.. nonce: mcS3I3
.. section: Tests

Fix regrtest parsing of --fromfile, --match, and --randomize options.

..

.. bpo: 16702
.. date: 9231
.. nonce: 3Xf_t-
.. section: Tests

test_urllib2_localnet tests now correctly ignores proxies for localhost
tests.

..

.. bpo: 16664
.. date: 9230
.. nonce: CxbZwX
.. section: Tests

Add regression tests for glob's behaviour concerning entries starting with a
".".  Patch by Sebastian Kreft.

..

.. bpo: 16559
.. date: 9229
.. nonce: JvxWbq
.. section: Tests

Add more tests for the json module, including some from the official test
suite at json.org.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16661
.. date: 9228
.. nonce: Qn2hnC
.. section: Tests

Fix the `os.getgrouplist()` test by not assuming that it gives the same
output as :command:`id -G`.

..

.. bpo: 16115
.. date: 9227
.. nonce: vhK6oh
.. section: Tests

Add some tests for the executable argument to subprocess.Popen().  Initial
patch by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 16126
.. date: 9226
.. nonce: blh5K0
.. section: Tests

PyErr_Format format mismatch in _testcapimodule.c. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15304
.. date: 9225
.. nonce: DhyMtI
.. section: Tests

Fix warning message when `os.chdir()` fails inside
`test.support.temp_cwd()`.  Patch by Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 15802
.. date: 9224
.. nonce: 1duwD4
.. section: Tests

Fix test logic in `TestMaildir.test_create_tmp()`. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15557
.. date: 9223
.. nonce: i62LMR
.. section: Tests

Add a test suite for the `webbrowser` module, thanks to Anton Barkovsky.

..

.. bpo: 16698
.. date: 9222
.. nonce: RgmYjY
.. section: Tests

Skip posix test_getgroups when built with OS X deployment target prior to
10.6.

..

.. bpo: 17550
.. date: 9221
.. nonce: zn8gOk
.. section: Build

Fix the --enable-profiling configure switch.

..

.. bpo: 17425
.. date: 9220
.. nonce: Ix2fQh
.. section: Build

Build with openssl 1.0.1d on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16754
.. date: 9219
.. nonce: fLN-7H
.. section: Build

Fix the incorrect shared library extension on linux. Introduce two makefile
macros SHLIB_SUFFIX and EXT_SUFFIX. SO now has the value of SHLIB_SUFFIX
again (as in 2.x and 3.1). The SO macro is removed in 3.4.

..

.. bpo: 5033
.. date: 9218
.. nonce: HKAgDA
.. section: Build

Fix building of the sqlite3 extension module when the SQLite library version
has "beta" in it. Patch by Andreas Pelme.

..

.. bpo: 17228
.. date: 9217
.. nonce: CCkAM0
.. section: Build

Fix building without pymalloc.

..

.. bpo: 3718
.. date: 9216
.. nonce: n6-Cv2
.. section: Build

Use AC_ARG_VAR to set MACHDEP in configure.ac.

..

.. bpo: 17031
.. date: 9215
.. nonce: 947KBS
.. section: Build

Fix running regen in cross builds.

..

.. bpo: 3754
.. date: 9214
.. nonce: sUdOUp
.. section: Build

fix typo in pthread AC_CACHE_VAL.

..

.. bpo: 15484
.. date: 9213
.. nonce: CgA5fS
.. section: Build

Fix _PYTHON_PROJECT_BASE for srcdir != builddir builds; use
_PYTHON_PROJECT_BASE in distutils/sysconfig.py.

..

.. bpo: 17029
.. date: 9212
.. nonce: dUd1NT
.. section: Build

Let h2py search the multiarch system include directory.

..

.. bpo: 16953
.. date: 9211
.. nonce: tW1KVY
.. section: Build

Fix socket module compilation on platforms with HAVE_BROKEN_POLL. Patch by
Jeffrey Armstrong.

..

.. bpo: 16836
.. date: 9210
.. nonce: JZ-zO7
.. section: Build

Enable IPv6 support even if IPv6 is disabled on the build host.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9209
.. nonce: WRrrlF
.. section: Build

Cross compiling needs host and build settings. configure no longer creates a
broken PYTHON_FOR_BUILD variable when --build is missing.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9208
.. nonce: R2awqG
.. section: Build

Fix cross compiling issue in setup.py, ensure that lib_dirs and inc_dirs are
defined in cross compiling mode, too.

..

.. bpo: 16593
.. date: 9207
.. nonce: mS-VZr
.. section: Build

Have BSD 'make -s' do the right thing, thanks to Daniel Shahaf

..

.. bpo: 16262
.. date: 9206
.. nonce: puaCXo
.. section: Build

fix out-of-src-tree builds, if mercurial is not installed.

..

.. bpo: 15298
.. date: 9205
.. nonce: xiQHlO
.. section: Build

ensure _sysconfigdata is generated in build directory, not source directory.

..

.. bpo: 15833
.. date: 9204
.. nonce: tqz7oy
.. section: Build

Fix a regression in 3.3 that resulted in exceptions being raised if
importlib failed to write byte-compiled files.  This affected attempts to
build Python out-of-tree from a read-only source directory.

..

.. bpo: 15923
.. date: 9203
.. nonce: a2-GWK
.. section: Build

Fix a mistake in ``asdl_c.py`` that resulted in a TypeError after
2801bf875a24 (see #15801).

..

.. bpo: 15819
.. date: 9202
.. nonce: VE2bTI
.. section: Build

Make sure we can build Python out-of-tree from a read-only source directory.
(Somewhat related to issue #9860.)

..

.. bpo: 15587
.. date: 9201
.. nonce: gR7vei
.. section: Build

Enable Tk high-resolution text rendering on Macs with Retina displays.
Applies to Tkinter apps, such as IDLE, on OS X framework builds linked with
Cocoa Tk 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 17161
.. date: 9200
.. nonce: AT7PDZ
.. section: Build

make install now also installs a python3 man page.

..

.. bpo: 16881
.. date: 9199
.. nonce: 8SMude
.. section: C API

Fix Py_ARRAY_LENGTH macro for GCC < 3.1.

..

.. bpo: 17538
.. date: 9198
.. nonce: M8FVLz
.. section: Documentation

Document XML vulnerabilties

..

.. bpo: 16642
.. date: 9197
.. nonce: Cee7KE
.. section: Documentation

sched.scheduler timefunc initial default is time.monotonic. Patch by
Ramchandra Apte

..

.. bpo: 17047
.. date: 9196
.. nonce: sVzpby
.. section: Documentation

remove doubled words in docs and docstrings reported by Serhiy Storchaka and
Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 15465
.. date: 9195
.. nonce: yN2tkV
.. section: Documentation

Document the versioning macros in the C API docs rather than the standard
library docs. Patch by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 16406
.. date: 9194
.. nonce: Q6DEK3
.. section: Documentation

Combine the pages for uploading and registering to PyPI.

..

.. bpo: 16403
.. date: 9193
.. nonce: wPuYgA
.. section: Documentation

Document how distutils uses the maintainer field in PKG-INFO. Patch by Jyrki
Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16695
.. date: 9192
.. nonce: O3-q4k
.. section: Documentation

Document how glob handles filenames starting with a dot. Initial patch by
Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 8890
.. date: 9191
.. nonce: ldKgWT
.. section: Documentation

Stop advertising an insecure practice by replacing uses of the /tmp
directory with better alternatives in the documentation. Patch by Geoff
Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 17203
.. date: 9190
.. nonce: b42JWx
.. section: Documentation

add long option names to unittest discovery docs.

..

.. bpo: 13094
.. date: 9189
.. nonce: ujdNxz
.. section: Documentation

add "Why do lambdas defined in a loop with different values all return the
same result?" programming FAQ.

..

.. bpo: 14901
.. date: 9188
.. nonce: o_thZo
.. section: Documentation

Update portions of the Windows FAQ. Patch by Ashish Nitin Patil.

..

.. bpo: 16267
.. date: 9187
.. nonce: SSKvue
.. section: Documentation

Better document the 3.3+ approach to combining @abstractmethod with
@staticmethod, @classmethod and @property

..

.. bpo: 15209
.. date: 9186
.. nonce: w1UuQK
.. section: Documentation

Clarify exception chaining description in exceptions module documentation

..

.. bpo: 15990
.. date: 9185
.. nonce: 41C5_M
.. section: Documentation

Improve argument/parameter documentation.

..

.. bpo: 16209
.. date: 9184
.. nonce: 8-hM8N
.. section: Documentation

Move the documentation for the str built-in function to a new str class
entry in the "Text Sequence Type" section.

..

.. bpo: 13538
.. date: 9183
.. nonce: 6bfAto
.. section: Documentation

Improve str() and object.__str__() documentation.

..

.. bpo: 16489
.. date: 9182
.. nonce: 2ZQaC4
.. section: Documentation

Make it clearer that importlib.find_loader() requires any and all packages
to be separately imported.

..

.. bpo: 16400
.. date: 9181
.. nonce: kDLZRV
.. section: Documentation

Update the description of which versions of a given package PyPI displays.

..

.. bpo: 15677
.. date: 9180
.. nonce: _0vY-h
.. section: Documentation

Document that zlib and gzip accept a compression level of 0 to mean 'no
compression'. Patch by Brian Brazil.

..

.. bpo: 16197
.. date: 9179
.. nonce: LT1sjI
.. section: Documentation

Update winreg docstrings and documentation to match code. Patch by Zachary
Ware.

..

.. bpo: 8040
.. date: 9178
.. nonce: R8VAys
.. section: Documentation

added a version switcher to the documentation.  Patch by Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 16241
.. date: 9177
.. nonce: LfdE7f
.. section: Documentation

Document -X faulthandler command line option. Patch by Marek Šuppa.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9176
.. nonce: tWKgrg
.. section: Documentation

Additional comments and some style changes in the concurrent.futures URL
retrieval example

..

.. bpo: 16115
.. date: 9175
.. nonce: Ba1MH_
.. section: Documentation

Improve subprocess.Popen() documentation around args, shell, and executable
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 15533
.. date: 9174
.. nonce: oRcsqW
.. section: Documentation

Clarify docs and add tests for `subprocess.Popen()`'s cwd argument.

..

.. bpo: 15979
.. date: 9173
.. nonce: UATtRZ
.. section: Documentation

Improve timeit documentation.

..

.. bpo: 16036
.. date: 9172
.. nonce: ITDZx_
.. section: Documentation

Improve documentation of built-in `int()`'s signature and arguments.

..

.. bpo: 15935
.. date: 9171
.. nonce: 49QYHM
.. section: Documentation

Clarification of `argparse` docs, re: add_argument() type and default
arguments.  Patch contributed by Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 11964
.. date: 9170
.. nonce: TswBww
.. section: Documentation

Document a change in v3.2 to the behavior of the indent parameter of json
encoding operations.

..

.. bpo: 15116
.. date: 9169
.. nonce: uDQI_8
.. section: Documentation

Remove references to appscript as it is no longer being supported.

..

.. bpo: 17156
.. date: 9168
.. nonce: QXT00X
.. section: Tools/Demos

pygettext.py now uses an encoding of source file and correctly writes and
escapes non-ascii characters.

..

.. bpo: 15539
.. date: 9167
.. nonce: 6bqqV-
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a number of bugs in Tools/scripts/pindent.py.  Now pindent.py works with
a "with" statement.  pindent.py no longer produces improper indentation.
pindent.py now works with continued lines broken after "class" or "def"
keywords and with continuations at the start of line.

..

.. bpo: 15378
.. date: 9166
.. nonce: IO1T92
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix Tools/unicode/comparecodecs.py.  Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 16476
.. date: 9165
.. nonce: xAomrd
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix json.tool to avoid including trailing whitespace.

..

.. bpo: 16549
.. date: 9164
.. nonce: 2Pj5iC
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make json.tool work again on Python 3 and add tests. Initial patch by Berker
Peksag and Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 13301
.. date: 9163
.. nonce: G6BNT_
.. section: Tools/Demos

use ast.literal_eval() instead of eval() in Tools/i18n/msgfmt.py Patch by
Serhiy Storchaka.
