.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7811
.. nonce: W5Dg6D
.. release date: 27-Jun-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a (most likely) very rare memory leak when calling main() and not being
able to decode a command-line argument.

..

.. bpo: 14815
.. date: 7810
.. nonce: 45V0nb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use Py_ssize_t instead of long for the object hash, to preserve all 64 bits
of hash on Win64.

..

.. bpo: 12268
.. date: 7809
.. nonce: Fa6oWZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

File readline, readlines and read() or readall() methods no longer lose data
when an underlying read system call is interrupted. IOError is no longer
raised due to a read system call returning EINTR from within these methods.

..

.. bpo: 11626
.. date: 7808
.. nonce: Cz1C0D
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add _SizeT functions to stable ABI.

..

.. bpo: 15142
.. date: 7807
.. nonce: 5oTAbU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix reference leak when deallocating instances of types created using
PyType_FromSpec().

..

.. bpo: 10053
.. date: 7806
.. nonce: rOxp0i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't close FDs when FileIO.__init__ fails. Loosely based on the work by
Hirokazu Yamamoto.

..

.. bpo: 15096
.. date: 7805
.. nonce: -vHRNP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Removed support for ur'' as the raw notation isn't compatible with Python
2.x's raw unicode strings.

..

.. bpo: 13783
.. date: 7804
.. nonce: oAPO08
.. section: Core and Builtins

Generator objects now use the identifier APIs internally

..

.. bpo: 14874
.. date: 7803
.. nonce: KWh9rA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restore charmap decoding speed to pre-PEP 393 levels. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15026
.. date: 7802
.. nonce: iJiLbE
.. section: Core and Builtins

utf-16 encoding is now significantly faster (up to 10x). Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 11022
.. date: 7801
.. nonce: iWeA3q
.. section: Core and Builtins

open() and io.TextIOWrapper are now calling
locale.getpreferredencoding(False) instead of locale.getpreferredencoding()
in text mode if the encoding is not specified. Don't change temporary the
locale encoding using locale.setlocale(), use the current locale encoding
instead of the user preferred encoding.

..

.. bpo: 14673
.. date: 7800
.. nonce: 39dCQW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add Eric Snow's sys.implementation implementation.

..

.. bpo: 15038
.. date: 7799
.. nonce: MfnJgf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize python Locks on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 12288
.. date: 7798
.. nonce: EeBUVC
.. section: Library

Consider '0' and '0.0' as valid initialvalue for tkinter SimpleDialog.

..

.. bpo: 15512
.. date: 7797
.. nonce: JO3bbV
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for parser. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15469
.. date: 7796
.. nonce: eFsJXX
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for deque objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15489
.. date: 7795
.. nonce: P9-vH9
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for BytesIO objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15487
.. date: 7794
.. nonce: vtEBtw
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for buffered I/O objects. Patch by Serhiy
Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15514
.. date: 7793
.. nonce: LrtaLi
.. section: Library

Correct __sizeof__ support for cpu_set. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15177
.. date: 7792
.. nonce: mugCse
.. section: Library

Added dir_fd parameter to os.fwalk().

..

.. bpo: 15061
.. date: 7791
.. nonce: Tdc4LD
.. section: Library

Re-implemented hmac.compare_digest() in C to prevent further timing analysis
and to support all buffer protocol aware objects as well as ASCII only str
instances safely.

..

.. bpo: 15164
.. date: 7790
.. nonce: Cf_2-u
.. section: Library

Change return value of platform.uname() from a plain tuple to a
collections.namedtuple.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7789
.. nonce: pyCKJV
.. section: Library

Support Mageia Linux in the platform module.

..

.. bpo: 11678
.. date: 7788
.. nonce: nRPz5B
.. section: Library

Support Arch linux in the platform module.

..

.. bpo: 15118
.. date: 7787
.. nonce: Gwp7ck
.. section: Library

Change return value of os.uname() and os.times() from plain tuples to
immutable iterable objects with named attributes (structseq objects).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7786
.. nonce: t7_10R
.. section: Library

Speed up _decimal by another 10-15% by caching the thread local context that
was last accessed. In the pi benchmark (64-bit platform, prec=9), _decimal
is now only 1.5x slower than float.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7785
.. nonce: DfxA5d
.. section: Library

Remove the packaging module, which is not ready for prime time.

..

.. bpo: 15154
.. date: 7784
.. nonce: 6DL5F6
.. section: Library

Add "dir_fd" parameter to os.rmdir, remove "rmdir" parameter from os.remove
/ os.unlink.

..

.. bpo: 4489
.. date: 7783
.. nonce: 80FMx7
.. section: Library

Add a shutil.rmtree that isn't susceptible to symlink attacks. It is used
automatically on platforms supporting the necessary os.openat() and
os.unlinkat() functions. Main code by Martin von Löwis.

..

.. bpo: 15156
.. date: 7782
.. nonce: PZwcLE
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now uses the new "html.entities.html5" dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 11113
.. date: 7781
.. nonce: lFZ9C8
.. section: Library

add a new "html5" dictionary containing the named character references
defined by the HTML5 standard and the equivalent Unicode character(s) to the
html.entities module.

..

.. bpo: 15114
.. date: 7780
.. nonce: Lgl5HS
.. section: Library

the strict mode of HTMLParser and the HTMLParseError exception are
deprecated now that the parser is able to parse invalid markup.

..

.. bpo: 3665
.. date: 7779
.. nonce: JdTN3o
.. section: Library

\u and \U escapes are now supported in unicode regular expressions.  Patch
by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15153
.. date: 7778
.. nonce: 7Erki6
.. section: Library

Added inspect.getgeneratorlocals to simplify white box testing of generator
state updates

..

.. bpo: 13062
.. date: 7777
.. nonce: E3N4GG
.. section: Library

Added inspect.getclosurevars to simplify testing stateful closures

..

.. bpo: 11024
.. date: 7776
.. nonce: sIkKrN
.. section: Library

Fixes and additional tests for Time2Internaldate.

..

.. bpo: 14626
.. date: 7775
.. nonce: YaNACw
.. section: Library

Large refactoring of functions / parameters in the os module. Many functions
now support "dir_fd" and "follow_symlinks" parameters; some also support
accepting an open file descriptor in place of a path string.  Added
os.support_* collections as LBYL helpers.  Removed many functions only
previously seen in 3.3 alpha releases (often starting with "f" or "l", or
ending with "at").  Originally suggested by Serhiy Storchaka; implemented by
Larry Hastings.

..

.. bpo: 15008
.. date: 7774
.. nonce: uNEUW0
.. section: Library

Implement PEP 362 "Signature Objects". Patch by Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 15138
.. date: 7773
.. nonce: 46GZd_
.. section: Library

base64.urlsafe_{en,de}code() are now 3-4x faster.

..

.. bpo: 444582
.. date: 7772
.. nonce: 5WoE2u
.. section: Library

Add shutil.which, for finding programs on the system path. Original patch by
Erik Demaine, with later iterations by Jan Killian and Brian Curtin.

..

.. bpo: 14837
.. date: 7771
.. nonce: vbThDc
.. section: Library

SSL errors now have ``library`` and ``reason`` attributes describing
precisely what happened and in which OpenSSL submodule.  The str() of a
SSLError is also enhanced accordingly.

..

.. bpo: 9527
.. date: 7770
.. nonce: XkoH17
.. section: Library

datetime.astimezone() method will now supply a class timezone instance
corresponding to the system local timezone when called with no arguments.

..

.. bpo: 14653
.. date: 7769
.. nonce: wxr1Hp
.. section: Library

email.utils.mktime_tz() no longer relies on system mktime() when timezone
offest is supplied.

..

.. bpo: 14684
.. date: 7768
.. nonce: OID9fT
.. section: Library

zlib.compressobj() and zlib.decompressobj() now support the use of
predefined compression dictionaries. Original patch by Sam Rushing.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7767
.. nonce: FbQz2w
.. section: Library

Fix GzipFile's handling of filenames given as bytes objects.

..

.. bpo: 14772
.. date: 7766
.. nonce: V7wcfU
.. section: Library

Return destination values from some shutil functions.

..

.. bpo: 15064
.. date: 7765
.. nonce: wPnVMo
.. section: Library

Implement context manager protocol for multiprocessing types

..

.. bpo: 15101
.. date: 7764
.. nonce: IWvk9X
.. section: Library

Make pool finalizer avoid joining current thread.

..

.. bpo: 14657
.. date: 7763
.. nonce: 8vzCOZ
.. section: Library

The frozen instance of importlib used for bootstrap is now also the module
imported as importlib._bootstrap.

..

.. bpo: 14055
.. date: 7762
.. nonce: ZbpXDl
.. section: Library

Add __sizeof__ support to _elementtree.

..

.. bpo: 15054
.. date: 7761
.. nonce: ksFSjl
.. section: Library

A bug in tokenize.tokenize that caused string literals with 'b' prefixes to
be incorrectly tokenized has been fixed. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 15006
.. date: 7760
.. nonce: dsEK8l
.. section: Library

Allow equality comparison between naive and aware time or datetime objects.

..

.. bpo: 15036
.. date: 7759
.. nonce: Mhm512
.. section: Library

Mailbox no longer throws an error if a flush is done between operations when
removing or changing multiple items in mbox, MMDF, or Babyl mailboxes.

..

.. bpo: 14059
.. date: 7758
.. nonce: XZqDyi
.. section: Library

Implement multiprocessing.Barrier.

..

.. bpo: 15061
.. date: 7757
.. nonce: tO-GpZ
.. section: Library

The inappropriately named hmac.secure_compare has been renamed to
hmac.compare_digest, restricted to operating on bytes inputs only and had
its documentation updated to more accurately reflect both its intent and its
limitations

..

.. bpo: 13841
.. date: 7756
.. nonce: -L7_Vz
.. section: Library

Make child processes exit using sys.exit() on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 14936
.. date: 7755
.. nonce: dWJWXJ
.. section: Library

curses_panel was converted to PEP 3121 and PEP 384 API. Patch by Robin
Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 1667546
.. date: 7754
.. nonce: 0Ml07f
.. section: Library

On platforms supporting tm_zone and tm_gmtoff fields in struct tm,
time.struct_time objects returned by time.gmtime(), time.localtime() and
time.strptime() functions now have tm_zone and tm_gmtoff attributes.
Original patch by Paul Boddie.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7753
.. nonce: yI710S
.. section: Library

Rename adjusted attribute to adjustable in time.get_clock_info() result.

..

.. bpo: 3518
.. date: 7752
.. nonce: sAhuMS
.. section: Library

Remove references to non-existent BaseManager.from_address() method.

..

.. bpo: 13857
.. date: 7751
.. nonce: nM4Pjv
.. section: Library

Added textwrap.indent() function (initial patch by Ezra Berch)

..

.. bpo: 2736
.. date: 7750
.. nonce: 3ntjsv
.. section: Library

Added datetime.timestamp() method.

..

.. bpo: 13854
.. date: 7749
.. nonce: ms8PU3
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing properly handle non-integer non-string argument to
SystemExit.

..

.. bpo: 12157
.. date: 7748
.. nonce: awxWQJ
.. section: Library

Make pool.map() empty iterables correctly.  Initial patch by mouad.

..

.. bpo: 11823
.. date: 7747
.. nonce: OYVwDs
.. section: Library

disassembly now shows argument counts on calls with keyword args.

..

.. bpo: 14711
.. date: 7746
.. nonce: Msj3S3
.. section: Library

os.stat_float_times() has been deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7745
.. nonce: vKEq1w
.. section: Library

LZMAFile now accepts the modes "rb"/"wb"/"ab" as synonyms of "r"/"w"/"a".

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7744
.. nonce: ic3GYd
.. section: Library

The bz2 and lzma modules now each contain an open() function, allowing
compressed files to readily be opened in text mode as well as binary mode.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7743
.. nonce: JZXYUZ
.. section: Library

BZ2File.__init__() and LZMAFile.__init__() now accept a file object as their
first argument, rather than requiring a separate "fileobj" argument.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7742
.. nonce: yr4hFr
.. section: Library

gzip.open() now accepts file objects as well as filenames.

..

.. bpo: 14992
.. date: 7741
.. nonce: BZpm2F
.. section: Library

os.makedirs(path, exist_ok=True) would raise an OSError when the path
existed and had the S_ISGID mode bit set when it was not explicitly asked
for.  This is no longer an exception as mkdir cannot control if the OS sets
that bit for it or not.

..

.. bpo: 14989
.. date: 7740
.. nonce: ctDCrK
.. section: Library

Make the CGI enable option to http.server available via command line.

..

.. bpo: 14987
.. date: 7739
.. nonce: jqZ71e
.. section: Library

Add a missing import statement to inspect.

..

.. bpo: 1079
.. date: 7738
.. nonce: D5DJz8
.. section: Library

email.header.decode_header now correctly parses all the examples in RFC2047.
There is a necessary visible behavior change: the leading and/or trailing
whitespace on ASCII parts is now preserved.

..

.. bpo: 14969
.. date: 7737
.. nonce: VBSxHs
.. section: Library

Better handling of exception chaining in contextlib.ExitStack

..

.. bpo: 14963
.. date: 7736
.. nonce: --tMTo
.. section: Library

Convert contextlib.ExitStack.__exit__ to use an iterative algorithm (Patch
by Alon Horev)

..

.. bpo: 14785
.. date: 7735
.. nonce: fYs65U
.. section: Library

Add sys._debugmallocstats() to help debug low-level memory allocation issues

..

.. bpo: 14443
.. date: 7734
.. nonce: p-bqtq
.. section: Library

Ensure that .py files are byte-compiled with the correct Python executable
within bdist_rpm even on older versions of RPM

..

.. bpo: 15146
.. date: 7733
.. nonce: 2Jz2so
.. section: C API

Add PyType_FromSpecWithBases. Patch by Robin Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 15042
.. date: 7732
.. nonce: kYm4US
.. section: C API

Add PyState_AddModule and PyState_RemoveModule. Add version guard for
Py_LIMITED_API additions. Patch by Robin Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 13783
.. date: 7731
.. nonce: g0bioG
.. section: C API

Inadvertent additions to the public C API in the PEP 380 implementation have
either been removed or marked as private interfaces.

..

.. bpo: 15000
.. date: 7730
.. nonce: 8XUbk3
.. section: Library

Support the "unique" x32 architecture in _posixsubprocess.c.

..

.. bpo: 9803
.. date: 7729
.. nonce: lJhnei
.. section: IDLE

Don't close IDLE on saving if breakpoint is open. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 14962
.. date: 7728
.. nonce: W_t8Sw
.. section: IDLE

Update text coloring in IDLE shell window after changing options.  Patch by
Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 15176
.. date: 7727
.. nonce: HgYfxh
.. section: Documentation

Clarified behavior, documentation, and implementation of os.listdir().

..

.. bpo: 14982
.. date: 7726
.. nonce: xKhYZ8
.. section: Documentation

Document that pkgutil's iteration functions require the non-standard
iter_modules() method to be defined by an importer (something the importlib
importers do not define).

..

.. bpo: 15081
.. date: 7725
.. nonce: aCqyXV
.. section: Documentation

Document PyState_FindModule. Patch by Robin Schreiber.

..

.. bpo: 14814
.. date: 7724
.. nonce: La_dla
.. section: Documentation

Added first draft of ipaddress module API reference

..

.. bpo: 15187
.. date: 7723
.. nonce: bw-thN
.. section: Tests

Bugfix: remove temporary directories test_shutil was leaving behind.

..

.. bpo: 14769
.. date: 7722
.. nonce: WxaMcY
.. section: Tests

test_capi now has SkipitemTest, which cleverly checks for "parity" between
PyArg_ParseTuple() and the Python/getargs.c static function skipitem() for
all possible "format units".

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7721
.. nonce: sQs1l0
.. section: Tests

test_nntplib now tolerates being run from behind NNTP gateways that add
"X-Antivirus" headers to articles

..

.. bpo: 15043
.. date: 7720
.. nonce: R2j8Hb
.. section: Tests

test_gdb is now skipped entirely if gdb security settings block loading of
the gdb hooks

..

.. bpo: 14963
.. date: 7719
.. nonce: ds1Xe1
.. section: Tests

Add test cases for exception handling behaviour in contextlib.ExitStack
(Initial patch by Alon Horev)

..

.. bpo: 13590
.. date: 7718
.. nonce: A_UtOA
.. section: Build

Improve support for OS X Xcode 4:   * Try to avoid building Python or
extension modules with problematic     llvm-gcc compiler.   * Since Xcode 4
removes ppc support, extension module builds now     check for ppc compiler
support and automatically remove ppc and     ppc64 archs when not available.
* Since Xcode 4 no longer install SDKs in default locations,     extension
module builds now revert to using installed headers     and libs if the SDK
used to build the interpreter is not     available.   * Update ./configure
to use better defaults for universal builds;     in particular, --enable-
universalsdk=yes uses the Xcode default     SDK and --with-universal-archs
now defaults to "intel" if ppc     not available.

..

.. bpo: 14225
.. date: 7717
.. nonce: OrLFhQ
.. section: Build

Fix Unicode support for curses (#12567) on OS X

..

.. bpo: 14928
.. date: 7716
.. nonce: nAGpn8
.. section: Build

Fix importlib bootstrap issues by using a custom executable
(Modules/_freeze_importlib) to build Python/importlib.h.
