.. bpo: 18603
.. date: 9769
.. nonce: 7SMyAQ
.. release date: 27-Oct-2013
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that PyOS_mystricmp and PyOS_mystrnicmp are in the Python executable
and not removed by the linker's optimizer.

..

.. bpo: 19279
.. date: 9768
.. nonce: 7NaMRl
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-7 decoder no more produces illegal strings.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9767
.. nonce: 5kIB0G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix macro expansion of _PyErr_OCCURRED(), and make sure to use it in at
least one place so as to avoid regressions.

..

.. bpo: 19014
.. date: 9766
.. nonce: y4w-XY
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview.cast() is now allowed on zero-length views.

..

.. bpo: 19098
.. date: 9765
.. nonce: 5XU9uv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent overflow in the compiler when the recursion limit is set absurdly
high.

..

.. bpo: 18942
.. date: 9764
.. nonce: xpMQx7
.. section: Core and Builtins

sys._debugmallocstats() output was damaged on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 18667
.. date: 9763
.. nonce: xycqzn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add missing "HAVE_FCHOWNAT" symbol to posix._have_functions.

..

.. bpo: 18368
.. date: 9762
.. nonce: SiCbun
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyOS_StdioReadline() no longer leaks memory when realloc() fails.

..

.. bpo: 16741
.. date: 9761
.. nonce: bBBAqs
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an error reporting in int().

..

.. bpo: 17899
.. date: 9760
.. nonce: Asq8mo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix rare file descriptor leak in os.listdir().

..

.. bpo: 18552
.. date: 9759
.. nonce: hbrQHu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Check return value of PyArena_AddPyObject() in obj2ast_object().

..

.. bpo: 18560
.. date: 9758
.. nonce: 5q_c1C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential NULL pointer dereference in sum().

..

.. bpo: 15905
.. date: 9757
.. nonce: RG-KXt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix theoretical buffer overflow in handling of sys.argv[0], prefix and
exec_prefix if the operation system does not obey MAXPATHLEN.

..

.. bpo: 18344
.. date: 9756
.. nonce: QFOn66
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential ref-leaks in _bufferedreader_read_all().

..

.. bpo: 17872
.. date: 9755
.. nonce: P_Eal-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a segfault in marshal.load() when input stream returns more bytes than
requested.

..

.. bpo: 18426
.. date: 9754
.. nonce: NdnL3v
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix NULL pointer dereference in C extension import when PyModule_GetDef()
returns an error.

..

.. bpo: 18328
.. date: 9753
.. nonce: JHuF3K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Reorder ops in PyThreadState_Delete*() functions. Now the tstate is first
removed from TLS and then deallocated.

..

.. bpo: 18184
.. date: 9752
.. nonce: xLNVG3
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyUnicode_FromFormat() and PyUnicode_FromFormatV() now raise OverflowError
when an argument of %c format is out of range.

..

.. bpo: 18137
.. date: 9751
.. nonce: a_Vsor
.. section: Core and Builtins

Detect integer overflow on precision in float.__format__() and
complex.__format__().

..

.. bpo: 18183
.. date: 9750
.. nonce: v68GC2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix various unicode operations on strings with large unicode codepoints.

..

.. bpo: 18180
.. date: 9749
.. nonce: GqAflm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ref leak in _PyImport_GetDynLoadWindows().

..

.. bpo: 18038
.. date: 9748
.. nonce: Q8prhd
.. section: Core and Builtins

SyntaxError raised during compilation sources with illegal encoding now
always contains an encoding name.

..

.. bpo: 17644
.. date: 9747
.. nonce: OuMIFJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in str.format when curly braces are used in square brackets.

..

.. bpo: 17983
.. date: 9746
.. nonce: pId3yt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a SyntaxError for a ``global __class__`` statement in a class body.

..

.. bpo: 17927
.. date: 9745
.. nonce: j9LJto
.. section: Core and Builtins

Frame objects kept arguments alive if they had been copied into a cell, even
if the cell was cleared.

..

.. bpo: 19395
.. date: 9744
.. nonce: 7iyQxb
.. section: Library

Raise an exception when attempting to pickle a bz2 or lzma
compressor/decompressor object, rather than creating a pickle that would
cause a segfault when loaded and used.

..

.. bpo: 19227
.. date: 9743
.. nonce: -dpnbn
.. section: Library

Try to fix deadlocks caused by re-seeding then OpenSSL pseudo-random number
generator on fork().

..

.. bpo: 16037
.. date: 9742
.. nonce: cxufSm
.. section: Library

HTTPMessage.readheaders() raises an HTTPException when more than 100 headers
are read.  Adapted from patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16040
.. date: 9741
.. nonce: xg3xlX
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: nntplib: Limit maximum line lengths to 2048 to prevent
readline() calls from consuming too much memory.  Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16041
.. date: 9740
.. nonce: XFY0lr
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: poplib: Limit maximum line lengths to 2048 to prevent
readline() calls from consuming too much memory.  Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 17997
.. date: 9739
.. nonce: sJUozx
.. section: Library

Change behavior of ``ssl.match_hostname()`` to follow RFC 6125, for security
reasons.  It now doesn't match multiple wildcards nor wildcards inside IDN
fragments.

..

.. bpo: 16039
.. date: 9738
.. nonce: ipafYi
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: Change use of readline in imaplib module to limit line
length.  Patch by Emil Lind.

..

.. bpo: 19393
.. date: 9737
.. nonce: ytbAwl
.. section: Library

Fix symtable.symtable function to not be confused when there are functions
or classes named "top".

..

.. bpo: 19339
.. date: 9736
.. nonce: kxMuh2
.. section: Library

telnetlib module is now using time.monotonic() when available to compute
timeout.

..

.. bpo: 19288
.. date: 9735
.. nonce: nKDzgw
.. section: Library

Fixed the "in" operator of dbm.gnu databases for string argument.  Original
patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 19287
.. date: 9734
.. nonce: IVl3jY
.. section: Library

Fixed the "in" operator of dbm.ndbm databases for string argument.  Original
patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 19327
.. date: 9733
.. nonce: S7Xvxs
.. section: Library

Fixed the working of regular expressions with too big charset.

..

.. bpo: 19350
.. date: 9732
.. nonce: MCCKjK
.. section: Library

Increasing the test coverage of macurl2path. Patch by Colin Williams.

..

.. bpo: 19352
.. date: 9731
.. nonce: 3TfAkY
.. section: Library

Fix unittest discovery when a module can be reached through several paths
(e.g. under Debian/Ubuntu with virtualenv).

..

.. bpo: 15207
.. date: 9730
.. nonce: piOBBi
.. section: Library

Fix mimetypes to read from correct part of Windows registry Original patch
by Dave Chambers

..

.. bpo: 8964
.. date: 9729
.. nonce: dzU2FB
.. section: Library

fix platform._sys_version to handle IronPython 2.6+. Patch by Martin
Matusiak.

..

.. bpo: 16038
.. date: 9728
.. nonce: TZGbSo
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: ftplib: Limit amount of data read by limiting the call to
readline().  Original patch by Michał Jastrzębski and Giampaolo Rodola.

..

.. bpo: 18235
.. date: 9727
.. nonce: LdBO1h
.. section: Library

Fix the sysconfig variables LDSHARED and BLDSHARED under AIX. Patch by David
Edelsohn.

..

.. bpo: 19276
.. date: 9726
.. nonce: Y69Qmv
.. section: Library

Fixed the wave module on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 18776
.. date: 9725
.. nonce: Y-0SKr
.. section: Library

atexit callbacks now display their full traceback when they raise an
exception.

..

.. bpo: 17827
.. date: 9724
.. nonce: HJGFDL
.. section: Library

Add the missing documentation for ``codecs.encode`` and ``codecs.decode``.

..

.. bpo: 18458
.. date: 9723
.. nonce: 6Bs0gr
.. section: Library

Prevent crashes with newer versions of libedit.  Its readline emulation has
changed from 0-based indexing to 1-based like gnu readline. Original patch
by Ronald Oussoren.

..

.. bpo: 18919
.. date: 9722
.. nonce: 0MNmoz
.. section: Library

If the close() method of a writer in the sunau or wave module failed, second
invocation of close() and destructor no more raise an exception.

..

.. bpo: 19131
.. date: 9721
.. nonce: eZXzpr
.. section: Library

The aifc module now correctly reads and writes sampwidth of compressed
streams.

..

.. bpo: 19158
.. date: 9720
.. nonce: abSS41
.. section: Library

a rare race in BoundedSemaphore could allow .release() too often.

..

.. bpo: 18037
.. date: 9719
.. nonce: pmZRS7
.. section: Library

2to3 now escapes '\u' and '\U' in native strings.

..

.. bpo: 19137
.. date: 9718
.. nonce: Iuit_M
.. section: Library

The pprint module now correctly formats instances of set and frozenset
subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 19092
.. date: 9717
.. nonce: Z7dea9
.. section: Library

contextlib.ExitStack now correctly reraises exceptions from the __exit__
callbacks of inner context managers (Patch by Hrvoje Nikšić)

..

.. bpo: 12641
.. date: 9716
.. nonce: r9sIyX
.. section: Library

Avoid passing "-mno-cygwin" to the mingw32 compiler, except when necessary.
Patch by Oscar Benjamin.

..

.. bpo: 18594
.. date: 9715
.. nonce: PlVvno
.. section: Library

The fast path for collections.Counter() was never taken due to an over-
restrictive type check.  And the fallback path did not implement the same
algorithm as the pure python code.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9714
.. nonce: 08TsG5
.. section: Library

Properly initialize all fields of a SSL object after allocation.

..

.. bpo: 4366
.. date: 9713
.. nonce: lDEdfK
.. section: Library

Fix building extensions on all platforms when --enable-shared is used.

..

.. bpo: 18950
.. date: 9712
.. nonce: DHn3qf
.. section: Library

Fix miscellaneous bugs in the sunau module. Au_read.readframes() now updates
current file position and reads correct number of frames from multichannel
stream.  Au_write.writeframesraw() now correctly updates current file
position.  Au_read.getnframes() now returns an integer (as in Python 2).
Au_read and Au_write now correctly works with file object if start file
position is not a zero.

..

.. bpo: 19053
.. date: 9711
.. nonce: DkcFZ8
.. section: Library

ZipExtFile.read1() with non-zero argument no more returns empty bytes until
end of data.

..

.. bpo: 19028
.. date: 9710
.. nonce: DsQp47
.. section: Library

Fixed tkinter.Tkapp.merge() for non-string arguments.

..

.. bpo: 3015
.. date: 9709
.. nonce: Db5Zwa
.. section: Library

Fixed tkinter with wantobject=False.  Any Tcl command call returned empty
string.

..

.. bpo: 18050
.. date: 9708
.. nonce: z3MaRz
.. section: Library

Fixed an incompatibility of the re module with Python 3.3.0 binaries.

..

.. bpo: 19037
.. date: 9707
.. nonce: OfBhoU
.. section: Library

The mailbox module now makes all changes to maildir files before moving them
into place, to avoid race conditions with other programs that may be
accessing the maildir directory.

..

.. bpo: 14984
.. date: 9706
.. nonce: iRbFp4
.. section: Library

On POSIX systems, when netrc is called without a filename argument (and
therefore is reading the user's $HOME/.netrc file), it now enforces the same
security rules as typical ftp clients: the .netrc file must be owned by the
user that owns the process and must not be readable by any other user.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 9705
.. nonce: 3ezwXm
.. section: Library

The tokenize module now detects Python source code encoding only in comment
lines.

..

.. bpo: 17324
.. date: 9704
.. nonce: 0PkOTi
.. section: Library

Fix http.server's request handling case on trailing '/'. Patch contributed
by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19018
.. date: 9703
.. nonce: mntKOW
.. section: Library

The heapq.merge() function no longer suppresses IndexError in the underlying
iterables.

..

.. bpo: 18784
.. date: 9702
.. nonce: ocU3GG
.. section: Library

The uuid module no more attempts to load libc via ctypes.CDLL, if all
necessary functions are already found in libuuid. Patch by Evgeny Sologubov.

..

.. bpo: 18672
.. date: 9701
.. nonce: CIblDh
.. section: Library

Fixed format specifiers for Py_ssize_t in debugging output in the _sre
module.

..

.. bpo: 18830
.. date: 9700
.. nonce: Uzi-Y4
.. section: Library

inspect.getclasstree() no more produces duplicated entries even when input
list contains duplicates.

..

.. bpo: 18909
.. date: 9699
.. nonce: XSu98N
.. section: Library

Fix _tkinter.tkapp.interpaddr() on Windows 64-bit, don't cast 64-bit pointer
to long (32 bits).

..

.. bpo: 18876
.. date: 9698
.. nonce: 30Ist9
.. section: Library

The FileIO.mode attribute now better reflects the actual mode under which
the file was opened.  Patch by Erik Bray.

..

.. bpo: 18418
.. date: 9697
.. nonce: _SFG8w
.. section: Library

After fork(), reinit all threads states, not only active ones. Patch by A.
Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 16611
.. date: 9696
.. nonce: aHrYR1
.. section: Library

http.cookie now correctly parses the 'secure' and 'httponly' cookie flags.

..

.. bpo: 11973
.. date: 9695
.. nonce: uPtBvG
.. section: Library

Fix a problem in kevent. The flags and fflags fields are now properly
handled as unsigned.

..

.. bpo: 17702
.. date: 9694
.. nonce: A4eF-h
.. section: Library

On error, os.environb now removes suppress the except context when raising a
new KeyError with the original key.

..

.. bpo: 18755
.. date: 9693
.. nonce: GC4qeM
.. section: Library

Fixed the loader used in imp to allow get_data() to be called multiple
times.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 9692
.. nonce: NrXQBx
.. section: Library

Fixed some tkinter incompabilities with Tcl/Tk 8.6.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 9691
.. nonce: WqSHdP
.. section: Library

Tkinter's splitlist() and split() methods now accept Tcl_Obj argument.

..

.. bpo: 18324
.. date: 9690
.. nonce: 0vkj_r
.. section: Library

set_payload now correctly handles binary input.  This also supersedes the
previous fixes for #14360, #1717, and #16564.

..

.. bpo: 17119
.. date: 9689
.. nonce: KfZ3-l
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflows when processing large strings and tuples in the
tkinter module.

..

.. bpo: 18747
.. date: 9688
.. nonce: tPZkbG
.. section: Library

Re-seed OpenSSL's pseudo-random number generator after fork. A
pthread_atfork() parent handler is used to seed the PRNG with pid, time and
some stack data.

..

.. bpo: 8865
.. date: 9687
.. nonce: cKBSJh
.. section: Library

Concurrent invocation of select.poll.poll() now raises a RuntimeError
exception.  Patch by Christian Schubert.

..

.. bpo: 13461
.. date: 9686
.. nonce: nLeS2R
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the TextIOWrapper.tell method on 64-bit platforms.  Patch by
Yogesh Chaudhari.

..

.. bpo: 18777
.. date: 9685
.. nonce: VLsjOw
.. section: Library

The ssl module now uses the new CRYPTO_THREADID API of OpenSSL 1.0.0+
instead of the deprecated CRYPTO id callback function.

..

.. bpo: 18768
.. date: 9684
.. nonce: r3TSCo
.. section: Library

Correct doc string of RAND_edg(). Patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 18178
.. date: 9683
.. nonce: i4hnf-
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes on BSD. dlmalloc.c was compiled twice which broke malloc weak
symbols.

..

.. bpo: 18709
.. date: 9682
.. nonce: txXrAc
.. section: Library

Fix CVE-2013-4238. The SSL module now handles NULL bytes inside
subjectAltName correctly. Formerly the module has used OpenSSL's
GENERAL_NAME_print() function to get the string represention of ASN.1
strings for ``rfc822Name`` (email), ``dNSName`` (DNS) and
``uniformResourceIdentifier`` (URI).

..

.. bpo: 18756
.. date: 9681
.. nonce: moRUfX
.. section: Library

Improve error reporting in os.urandom() when the failure is due to something
else than /dev/urandom not existing (for example, exhausting the file
descriptor limit).

..

.. bpo: 18405
.. date: 9680
.. nonce: z6flbp
.. section: Library

Improve the entropy of crypt.mksalt().

..

.. bpo: 19151
.. date: 9679
.. nonce: 2MrIlH
.. section: Library

Fix docstring and use of _get_supported_file_loaders() to reflect 2-tuples.

..

.. bpo: 18676
.. date: 9678
.. nonce: WAq1iB
.. section: Library

Change 'positive' to 'non-negative' in queue.py put and get docstrings and
ValueError messages. Patch by Zhongyue Luo

..

.. bpo: 18681
.. date: 9677
.. nonce: 4sNSfz
.. section: Library

Fix a NameError in imp.reload() (noticed by Weizhao Li).

..

.. bpo: 8112
.. date: 9676
.. nonce: J4M-dG
.. section: Library

xlmrpc.server's DocXMLRPCServer server no longer raises an error if methods
have annotations; it now correctly displays the annotations.

..

.. bpo: 17998
.. date: 9675
.. nonce: hIbru5
.. section: Library

Fix an internal error in regular expression engine.

..

.. bpo: 17557
.. date: 9674
.. nonce: s6BEMI
.. section: Library

Fix os.getgroups() to work with the modified behavior of getgroups(2) on OS
X 10.8.  Original patch by Mateusz Lenik.

..

.. bpo: 18599
.. date: 9673
.. nonce: OLGDK_
.. section: Library

Fix name attribute of _sha1.sha1() object. It now returns 'SHA1' instead of
'SHA'.

..

.. bpo: 18561
.. date: 9672
.. nonce: vgaf-k
.. section: Library

Skip name in ctypes' _build_callargs() if name is NULL.

..

.. bpo: 18559
.. date: 9671
.. nonce: svR01x
.. section: Library

Fix NULL pointer dereference error in _pickle module

..

.. bpo: 18556
.. date: 9670
.. nonce: AA6Z-O
.. section: Library

Check the return value of a PyUnicode_AsWideChar() call in ctypes' U_set().

..

.. bpo: 18549
.. date: 9669
.. nonce: DfZaOD
.. section: Library

Eliminate dead code in socket_ntohl()

..

.. bpo: 18514
.. date: 9668
.. nonce: byuxVK
.. section: Library

Fix unreachable Py_DECREF() call in PyCData_FromBaseObj()

..

.. bpo: 18513
.. date: 9667
.. nonce: 12JUZi
.. section: Library

Fix behaviour of cmath.rect w.r.t. signed zeros on OS X 10.8 + gcc.

..

.. bpo: 18480
.. date: 9666
.. nonce: JoDjBC
.. section: Library

Add missing call to PyType_Ready to the _elementtree extension.

..

.. bpo: 17778
.. date: 9665
.. nonce: odXAnT
.. section: Library

Fix test discovery for test_multiprocessing. (Patch by Zachary Ware.)

..

.. bpo: 18431
.. date: 9664
.. nonce: 4TWlLe
.. section: Library

The new email header parser now decodes RFC2047 encoded words in structured
headers.

..

.. bpo: 18432
.. date: 9663
.. nonce: 3KWObr
.. section: Library

The sched module's queue method was incorrectly returning an iterator
instead of a list.

..

.. bpo: 18044
.. date: 9662
.. nonce: -TYxNg
.. section: Library

The new email header parser was mis-parsing encoded words where an encoded
character immediately followed the '?' that follows the CTE character,
resulting in a decoding failure.  They are now decoded correctly.

..

.. bpo: 18101
.. date: 9661
.. nonce: Y9oAK1
.. section: Library

Tcl.split() now process strings nested in a tuple as it do with byte
strings.

..

.. bpo: 17198
.. date: 9660
.. nonce: MZjVaU
.. section: Library

Fix a NameError in the dbm module.  Patch by Valentina Mukhamedzhanova.

..

.. bpo: 18013
.. date: 9659
.. nonce: wzBMJh
.. section: Library

Fix cgi.FieldStorage to parse the W3C sample form.

..

.. bpo: 18347
.. date: 9658
.. nonce: r98Yh-
.. section: Library

ElementTree's html serializer now preserves the case of closing tags.

..

.. bpo: 17261
.. date: 9657
.. nonce: FBzLVh
.. section: Library

Ensure multiprocessing's proxies use proper address.

..

.. bpo: 18343
.. date: 9656
.. nonce: hHmlM5
.. section: Library

faulthandler.register() now keeps the previous signal handler when the
function is called twice, so faulthandler.unregister() restores correctly
the original signal handler.

..

.. bpo: 17097
.. date: 9655
.. nonce: npje1S
.. section: Library

Make multiprocessing ignore EINTR.

..

.. bpo: 18339
.. date: 9654
.. nonce: tawrrh
.. section: Library

Negative ints keys in unpickler.memo dict no longer cause a segfault inside
the _pickle C extension.

..

.. bpo: 18224
.. date: 9653
.. nonce: QcraR9
.. section: Library

Removed pydoc script from created venv, as it causes problems on Windows and
adds no value over and above python -m pydoc ...

..

.. bpo: 18155
.. date: 9652
.. nonce: RNn8WU
.. section: Library

The csv module now correctly handles csv files that use a delimter character
that has a special meaning in regexes, instead of throwing an exception.

..

.. bpo: 14360
.. date: 9651
.. nonce: bn3mJY
.. section: Library

encode_quopri can now be successfully used as an encoder when constructing a
MIMEApplication object.

..

.. bpo: 18135
.. date: 9650
.. nonce: NUPrSU
.. section: Library

ssl.SSLSocket.write() now raises an OverflowError if the input string in
longer than 2 gigabytes, and ssl.SSLContext.load_cert_chain() raises a
ValueError if the password is longer than 2 gigabytes. The ssl module does
not support partial write.

..

.. bpo: 18248
.. date: 9649
.. nonce: SFH5BJ
.. section: Library

Fix libffi build on AIX.

..

.. bpo: 18259
.. date: 9648
.. nonce: _GlBhr
.. section: Library

Declare sethostname in socketmodule.c for AIX

..

.. bpo: 18167
.. date: 9647
.. nonce: CE6ZMO
.. section: Library

cgi.FieldStorage no longer fails to handle multipart/form-data when \r\n
appears at end of 65535 bytes without other newlines.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9646
.. nonce: Y71ClT
.. section: Library

subprocess: Prevent a possible double close of parent pipe fds when the
subprocess exec runs into an error.  Prevent a regular multi-close of the
/dev/null fd when any of stdin, stdout and stderr was set to DEVNULL.

..

.. bpo: 16102
.. date: 9645
.. nonce: Ue82lF
.. section: Library

Make uuid._netbios_getnode() work again on Python 3.

..

.. bpo: 18109
.. date: 9644
.. nonce: ix7u1y
.. section: Library

os.uname() now decodes fields from the locale encoding, and
socket.gethostname() now decodes the hostname from the locale encoding,
instead of using the UTF-8 encoding in strict mode.

..

.. bpo: 17403
.. date: 9643
.. nonce: LofZf_
.. section: Library

urllib.parse.robotparser normalizes the urls before adding to ruleline. This
helps in handling certain types invalid urls in a conservative manner.

..

.. bpo: 18025
.. date: 9642
.. nonce: i8mW0x
.. section: Library

Fixed a segfault in io.BufferedIOBase.readinto() when raw stream's read()
returns more bytes than requested.

..

.. bpo: 18011
.. date: 9641
.. nonce: lvv4RQ
.. section: Library

As was originally intended, base64.b32decode() now raises a binascii.Error
if there are non-b32-alphabet characters present in the input string,
instead of a TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 13772
.. date: 9640
.. nonce: fWrGZR
.. section: Library

Restored directory detection of targets in ``os.symlink`` on Windows, which
was temporarily removed in Python 3.2.3 due to an incomplete implementation.
The implementation now works even if the symlink is created in a location
other than the current directory.

..

.. bpo: 16986
.. date: 9639
.. nonce: FIEcEA
.. section: Library

ElementTree now correctly parses a string input not only when an internal
XML encoding is UTF-8 or US-ASCII.

..

.. bpo: 17812
.. date: 9638
.. nonce: Prgvk9
.. section: Library

Fixed quadratic complexity of base64.b32encode().

..

.. bpo: 17980
.. date: 9637
.. nonce: oLLRCS
.. section: Library

Fix possible abuse of ssl.match_hostname() for denial of service using
certificates with many wildcards (CVE-2013-2099).

..

.. bpo: 17981
.. date: 9636
.. nonce: kIczv7
.. section: Library

Closed socket on error in SysLogHandler.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9635
.. nonce: 9OGCJH
.. section: Library

Fix typos in the multiprocessing module.

..

.. bpo: 17754
.. date: 9634
.. nonce: xa6Bc3
.. section: Library

Make ctypes.util.find_library() independent of the locale.

..

.. bpo: 17968
.. date: 9633
.. nonce: nY_hjb
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in os.listxattr().

..

.. bpo: 17269
.. date: 9632
.. nonce: 7LxyKz
.. section: Library

Workaround for socket.getaddrinfo crash on MacOS X with port None or "0" and
flags AI_NUMERICSERV.

..

.. bpo: 18698
.. date: 9631
.. nonce: 3w6A5q
.. section: Library

Ensure imp.reload() returns the module out of sys.modules.

..

.. bpo: 18080
.. date: 9630
.. nonce: 98cUEc
.. section: Library

When building a C extension module on OS X, if the compiler is overriden
with the CC environment variable, use the new compiler as the default for
linking if LDSHARED is not also overriden.  This restores Distutils behavior
introduced in 3.2.3 and inadvertently dropped in 3.3.0.

..

.. bpo: 18113
.. date: 9629
.. nonce: 7w81KJ
.. section: Library

Fixed a refcount leak in the curses.panel module's set_userptr() method.
Reported by Atsuo Ishimoto.

..

.. bpo: 18849
.. date: 9628
.. nonce: Q0kF0R
.. section: Library

Fixed a Windows-specific tempfile bug where collision with an existing
directory caused mkstemp and related APIs to fail instead of retrying.
Report and fix by Vlad Shcherbina.

..

.. bpo: 19400
.. date: 9627
.. nonce: QAqpk5
.. section: Library

Prevent extension module build failures with Xcode 5 on OS X 10.8+ when
using a universal Python that included a PPC architecture, such as with a
python.org 32-bit-only binary installer.

..

.. bpo: 18351
.. date: 9626
.. nonce: RuQAVJ
.. section: C API

Fix various issues with a helper function in importlib used by
PyImport_ExecCodeModuleWithPathnames() (and thus by extension
PyImport_ExecCodeModule() and PyImport_ExecCodeModuleEx()).

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 9625
.. nonce: dyLPY9
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now detects Python source code encoding only in comment lines.

..

.. bpo: 18988
.. date: 9624
.. nonce: 6CpesW
.. section: IDLE

The "Tab" key now works when a word is already autocompleted.

..

.. bpo: 18489
.. date: 9623
.. nonce: nOvxOH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for SearchEngine. Original patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18429
.. date: 9622
.. nonce: F1lTq1
.. section: IDLE

Format / Format Paragraph, now works when comment blocks are selected. As
with text blocks, this works best when the selection only includes complete
lines.

..

.. bpo: 18226
.. date: 9621
.. nonce: 5HtrW1
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings and unittests for FormatParagraph.py. Original patches by
Todd Rovito and Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18279
.. date: 9620
.. nonce: UoF-oR
.. section: IDLE

Format - Strip trailing whitespace no longer marks a file as changed when it
has not been changed. This fix followed the addition of a test file
originally written by Phil Webster (the issue's main goal).

..

.. bpo: 7136
.. date: 9619
.. nonce: 7horQf
.. section: IDLE

In the Idle File menu, "New Window" is renamed "New File". Patch by Tal
Einat, Roget Serwy, and Todd Rovito.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9618
.. nonce: OsJiav
.. section: IDLE

Remove dead imports of imp.

..

.. bpo: 18196
.. date: 9617
.. nonce: hyO7x0
.. section: IDLE

Avoid displaying spurious SystemExit tracebacks.

..

.. bpo: 5492
.. date: 9616
.. nonce: LCx7lq
.. section: IDLE

Avoid traceback when exiting IDLE caused by a race condition.

..

.. bpo: 17511
.. date: 9615
.. nonce: 6XqdTH
.. section: IDLE

Keep IDLE find dialog open after clicking "Find Next". Original patch by
Sarah K.

..

.. bpo: 18055
.. date: 9614
.. nonce: e6MZXb
.. section: IDLE

Move IDLE off of imp and on to importlib.

..

.. bpo: 15392
.. date: 9613
.. nonce: ukT_lg
.. section: IDLE

Create a unittest framework for IDLE. Initial patch by Rajagopalasarma
Jayakrishnan. See Lib/idlelib/idle_test/README.txt for how to run Idle
tests.

..

.. bpo: 14146
.. date: 9612
.. nonce: -n5gzd
.. section: IDLE

Highlight source line while debugging on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17532
.. date: 9611
.. nonce: wgA70Z
.. section: IDLE

Always include Options menu for IDLE on OS X. Patch by Guilherme Simões.

..

.. bpo: 14407
.. date: 9610
.. nonce: -tmRl9
.. section: Tests

Fix unittest test discovery in test_concurrent_futures.

..

.. bpo: 18919
.. date: 9609
.. nonce: cEkIuG
.. section: Tests

Unified and extended tests for audio modules: aifc, sunau and wave.

..

.. bpo: 18952
.. date: 9608
.. nonce: ysovuf
.. section: Tests

Fix regression in support data downloads introduced when test.support was
converted to a package. Regression noticed by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 12037
.. date: 9607
.. nonce: pcCgBV
.. section: Tests

Fix test_email for desktop Windows.

..

.. bpo: 15507
.. date: 9606
.. nonce: 3_em_8
.. section: Tests

test_subprocess's test_send_signal could fail if the test runner were run in
an environment where the process inherited an ignore setting for SIGINT.
Restore the SIGINT handler to the desired KeyboardInterrupt raising one
during that test.

..

.. bpo: 18792
.. date: 9605
.. nonce: 5RkYdK
.. section: Tests

Use "127.0.0.1" or "::1" instead of "localhost" as much as possible, since
"localhost" goes through a DNS lookup under recent Windows versions.

..

.. bpo: 1666318
.. date: 9604
.. nonce: OPrK2i
.. section: Tests

Add a test that shutil.copytree() retains directory permissions.  Patch by
Catherine Devlin.

..

.. bpo: 18357
.. date: 9603
.. nonce: jRiyQA
.. section: Tests

add tests for dictview set difference. Patch by Fraser Tweedale.

..

.. bpo: 18273
.. date: 9602
.. nonce: t4fyCm
.. section: Tests

move the tests in Lib/test/json_tests to Lib/test/test_json and make them
discoverable by unittest.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9601
.. nonce: wExQ77
.. section: Tests

Fix a fcntl test case on KFreeBSD, Debian #708653 (Petr Salinger).

..

.. bpo: 18396
.. date: 9600
.. nonce: 3gPC49
.. section: Tests

Fix spurious test failure in test_signal on Windows when faulthandler is
enabled (Patch by Jeremy Kloth)

..

.. bpo: 17046
.. date: 9599
.. nonce: mQoh7R
.. section: Tests

Fix broken test_executable_without_cwd in test_subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 15415
.. date: 9598
.. nonce: u-UTrH
.. section: Tests

Add new temp_dir() and change_cwd() context managers to test.support, and
refactor temp_cwd() to use them.  Patch by Chris Jerdonek.

..

.. bpo: 15494
.. date: 9597
.. nonce: 52m-vd
.. section: Tests

test.support is now a package rather than a module (Initial patch by Indra
Talip)

..

.. bpo: 17944
.. date: 9596
.. nonce: 6e9wcJ
.. section: Tests

test_zipfile now discoverable and uses subclassing to generate tests for
different compression types.  Fixed a bug with skipping some tests due to
use of exhausted iterators.

..

.. bpo: 18266
.. date: 9595
.. nonce: Fs0fT4
.. section: Tests

test_largefile now works with unittest test discovery and supports running
only selected tests.  Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 17767
.. date: 9594
.. nonce: rObwV7
.. section: Tests

test_locale now works with unittest test discovery. Original patch by
Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 18375
.. date: 9593
.. nonce: yMrtSQ
.. section: Tests

Assume --randomize when --randseed is used for running the testsuite.

..

.. bpo: 11185
.. date: 9592
.. nonce: McIHeT
.. section: Tests

Fix test_wait4 under AIX.  Patch by Sébastien Sablé.

..

.. bpo: 17691
.. date: 9591
.. nonce: KHFcyE
.. section: Tests

test_univnewlines now works with unittest test discovery. Patch by Zachary
Ware.

..

.. bpo: 18094
.. date: 9590
.. nonce: VeMh1H
.. section: Tests

test_uuid no more reports skipped tests as passed.

..

.. bpo: 11995
.. date: 9589
.. nonce: varfN1
.. section: Tests

test_pydoc doesn't import all sys.path modules anymore.

..

.. bpo: 19392
.. date: 9588
.. nonce: pedFvt
.. section: Documentation

Document that `imp.reload()` now also requires `__loader__` to be set on the
module being reloaded.

..

.. bpo: 18758
.. date: 9587
.. nonce: hMCi7Z
.. section: Documentation

Fixed and improved cross-references.

..

.. bpo: 18743
.. date: 9586
.. nonce: PXRtAK
.. section: Documentation

Fix references to non-existant "StringIO" module.

..

.. bpo: 18783
.. date: 9585
.. nonce: n5K5vI
.. section: Documentation

Removed existing mentions of Python long type in docstrings, error messages
and comments.

..

.. bpo: 17701
.. date: 9584
.. nonce: FtTZ66
.. section: Documentation

Improving strftime documentation.

..

.. bpo: 18440
.. date: 9583
.. nonce: LyvSOC
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that `hash()` can truncate the value returned from an object's
custom `__hash__()` method.

..

.. bpo: 17953
.. date: 9582
.. nonce: rlP0my
.. section: Documentation

Mention that you shouldn't replace sys.modules and deleting key items will
cause Python to not be happy.

..

.. bpo: 17844
.. date: 9581
.. nonce: V3aWU6
.. section: Documentation

Add links to encoders and decoders for bytes-to-bytes codecs.

..

.. bpo: 14097
.. date: 9580
.. nonce: xeOs59
.. section: Documentation

improve the "introduction" page of the tutorial.

..

.. bpo: 17977
.. date: 9579
.. nonce: 5f6eWJ
.. section: Documentation

The documentation for the cadefault argument's default value in
urllib.request.urlopen() is fixed to match the code.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 9578
.. nonce: i_1Tf_
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now detect Python source code encoding
only in comment lines.

..

.. bpo: 18817
.. date: 9577
.. nonce: yma3Gh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a resource warning in Lib/aifc.py demo.

..

.. bpo: 18439
.. date: 9576
.. nonce: W9DxeL
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make patchcheck work on Windows for ACKS, NEWS.

..

.. bpo: 18448
.. date: 9575
.. nonce: eLT81k
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix a typo in Tools/demo/eiffel.py.

..

.. bpo: 18457
.. date: 9574
.. nonce: fTGIAR
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed saving of formulas and complex numbers in Tools/demo/ss1.py.

..

.. bpo: 18449
.. date: 9573
.. nonce: ufcaWC
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make Tools/demo/ss1.py work again on Python 3.  Patch by Févry Thibault.

..

.. bpo: 15239
.. date: 9572
.. nonce: uzPBlK
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make mkstringprep.py work again on Python 3.

..

.. bpo: 12990
.. date: 9571
.. nonce: E1geL-
.. section: Tools/Demos

The "Python Launcher" on OSX could not launch python scripts that have paths
that include wide characters.

..

.. bpo: 19356
.. date: 9570
.. nonce: lHamQS
.. section: Build

Avoid using a C variabled named "_self", it's a reserved word in some C
compilers.

..

.. bpo: 19130
.. date: 9569
.. nonce: 7l54jz
.. section: Build

Correct PCbuild/readme.txt, Python 3.3 and 3.4 require VS 2010.

..

.. bpo: 16067
.. date: 9568
.. nonce: xeYOfj
.. section: Build

Add description into MSI file to replace installer's temporary name.

..

.. bpo: 18256
.. date: 9567
.. nonce: PiEkYT
.. section: Build

Compilation fix for recent AIX releases.  Patch by David Edelsohn.

..

.. bpo: 15172
.. date: 9566
.. nonce: CpJRf2
.. section: Build

Document NASM 2.10+ as requirement for building OpenSSL 1.0.1 on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 1584
.. date: 9565
.. nonce: qjDxpR
.. section: Build

Provide options to override default search paths for Tcl and Tk when
building _tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 9564
.. nonce: 9Da_Rj
.. section: Build

Tcl/Tk 8.5.15 is now included with the OS X 10.6+ 64-bit/32-bit installer
for 10.6+.  It is no longer necessary to install a third-party version of
Tcl/Tk 8.5 to work around the problems in the Apple-supplied Tcl/Tk 8.5
shipped in OS X 10.6 and later releases.

..

.. bpo: 19019
.. date: 9563
.. nonce: 5W7lw_
.. section: Build

Change the OS X installer build script to use CFLAGS instead of OPT for
special build options.  By setting OPT, some compiler-specific options like
-fwrapv were overridden and thus not used, which could result in broken
interpreters when building with clang.
