.. bpo: 17825
.. date: 9893
.. nonce: toRoZf
.. release date: 26-Jan-2014
.. section: Core and Builtins

Cursor "^" is correctly positioned for SyntaxError and IndentationError.

..

.. bpo: 2382
.. date: 9892
.. nonce: kL_Sgg
.. section: Core and Builtins

SyntaxError cursor "^" is now written at correct position in most cases when
multibyte characters are in line (before "^").  This still not works
correctly with wide East Asian characters.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 9891
.. nonce: lhfZNw
.. section: Core and Builtins

The first line of Python script could be executed twice when the source
encoding was specified on the second line.  Now the source encoding
declaration on the second line isn't effective if the first line contains
anything except a comment.  'python -x' works now again with files with the
source encoding declarations, and can be used to make Python batch files on
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17432
.. date: 9890
.. nonce: mmNI4f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Drop UCS2 from names of Unicode functions in python3.def.

..

.. bpo: 19969
.. date: 9889
.. nonce: mmRsrB
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyBytes_FromFormatV() now raises an OverflowError if "%c" argument is not in
range [0; 255].

..

.. bpo: 14432
.. date: 9888
.. nonce: kZ1mYr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Generator now clears the borrowed reference to the thread state. Fix a crash
when a generator is created in a C thread that is destroyed while the
generator is still used. The issue was that a generator contains a frame,
and the frame kept a reference to the Python state of the destroyed C
thread. The crash occurs when a trace function is setup.

..

.. bpo: 19932
.. date: 9887
.. nonce: ZU_tXW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix typo in import.h, missing whitespaces in function prototypes.

..

.. bpo: 19729
.. date: 9886
.. nonce: HmZThe
.. section: Core and Builtins

In str.format(), fix recursive expansion in format spec.

..

.. bpo: 19638
.. date: 9885
.. nonce: lh5Awt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crash / undefined behaviour from huge (more than 2 billion
characters) input strings in _Py_dg_strtod.

..

.. bpo: 16042
.. date: 9884
.. nonce: Hj_jQP
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: smtplib: Limit amount of data read by limiting the call to
readline().  Original patch by Christian Heimes.

..

.. bpo: 20317
.. date: 9883
.. nonce: 9JI93M
.. section: Library

ExitStack.__exit__ could create a self-referential loop if an exception
raised by a cleanup operation already had its context set correctly (for
example, by the @contextmanager decorator). The infinite loop this caused is
now avoided by checking if the expected context is already set before trying
to fix it.

..

.. bpo: 20374
.. date: 9882
.. nonce: EWofHb
.. section: Library

Fix build with GNU readline >= 6.3.

..

.. bpo: 20262
.. date: 9881
.. nonce: co0t1R
.. section: Library

Warnings are raised now when duplicate names are added in the ZIP file or
too long ZIP file comment is truncated.

..

.. bpo: 18574
.. date: 9880
.. nonce: 28Z8aX
.. section: Library

Added missing newline in 100-Continue reply from
http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler. Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20270
.. date: 9879
.. nonce: Z2Cks9
.. section: Library

urllib.urlparse now supports empty ports.

..

.. bpo: 20243
.. date: 9878
.. nonce: nApKCK
.. section: Library

TarFile no longer raise ReadError when opened in write mode.

..

.. bpo: 20238
.. date: 9877
.. nonce: qojq-l
.. section: Library

TarFile opened with external fileobj and "w:gz" mode didn't write complete
output on close.

..

.. bpo: 20245
.. date: 9876
.. nonce: 93kf_h
.. section: Library

The open functions in the tarfile module now correctly handle empty mode.

..

.. bpo: 20242
.. date: 9875
.. nonce: yvmL9l
.. section: Library

Fixed basicConfig() format strings for the alternative formatting styles.
Thanks to kespindler for the bug report and patch.

..

.. bpo: 20246
.. date: 9874
.. nonce: CC8uTq
.. section: Library

Fix buffer overflow in socket.recvfrom_into.

..

.. bpo: 20206
.. date: 9873
.. nonce: CtFEMz
.. section: Library

Fix edge case in email.quoprimime.encode where it truncated lines ending in
a character needing encoding but no newline by using a more efficient
algorithm that doesn't have the bug. (See also: bpo-5803)

..

.. bpo: 19082
.. date: 9872
.. nonce: idZnK7
.. section: Library

Working xmlrpc.server and xmlrpc.client examples. Both in modules and in
documentation. Initial patch contributed by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 20138
.. date: 9871
.. nonce: A4c9qc
.. section: Library

The wsgiref.application_uri() and wsgiref.request_uri() functions now
conform to PEP 3333 when handle non-ASCII URLs.

..

.. bpo: 19097
.. date: 9870
.. nonce: 5aGg0o
.. section: Library

Raise the correct Exception when cgi.FieldStorage is given an invalid
fileobj.

..

.. bpo: 20217
.. date: 9869
.. nonce: -2EJAc
.. section: Library

Fix build in SCHED_SPORADIC is defined.

..

.. bpo: 13107
.. date: 9868
.. nonce: YgEEME
.. section: Library

argparse and optparse no longer raises an exception when output a help on
environment with too small COLUMNS.  Based on patch by Elazar Gershuni.

..

.. bpo: 20207
.. date: 9867
.. nonce: ziIyF1
.. section: Library

Always disable SSLv2 except when PROTOCOL_SSLv2 is explicitly asked for.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 9866
.. nonce: _8qsXn
.. section: Library

The tokenize module now ignore the source encoding declaration on the second
line if the first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 20078
.. date: 9865
.. nonce: 4FYvd_
.. section: Library

Reading malformed zipfiles no longer hangs with 100% CPU consumption.

..

.. bpo: 20113
.. date: 9864
.. nonce: T6DWMh
.. section: Library

os.readv() and os.writev() now raise an OSError exception on error instead
of returning -1.

..

.. bpo: 20072
.. date: 9863
.. nonce: FzVG15
.. section: Library

Fixed multiple errors in tkinter with wantobjects is False.

..

.. bpo: 20108
.. date: 9862
.. nonce: HxuC0s
.. section: Library

Avoid parameter name clash in inspect.getcallargs().

..

.. bpo: 12692
.. date: 9861
.. nonce: 3ZW-DI
.. section: Library

Backport the fix for ResourceWarning in test_urllib2net. This also helps in
closing the socket when Connection Close header is not sent.

..

.. bpo: 19422
.. date: 9860
.. nonce: 1dRaPS
.. section: Library

Explicitly disallow non-SOCK_STREAM sockets in the ssl module, rather than
silently let them emit clear text data.

..

.. bpo: 18116
.. date: 9859
.. nonce: ZOamPj
.. section: Library

getpass was always getting an error when testing /dev/tty, and thus was
always falling back to stdin, and would then raise an exception if stdin
could not be used (such as /dev/null).  It also leaked an open file. All of
these issues are now fixed.

..

.. bpo: 20027
.. date: 9858
.. nonce: dtB7OG
.. section: Library

Fixed locale aliases for devanagari locales.

..

.. bpo: 20067
.. date: 9857
.. nonce: MlnlYd
.. section: Library

Tkinter variables now work when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19020
.. date: 9856
.. nonce: _16K__
.. section: Library

Tkinter now uses splitlist() instead of split() in configure methods.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9855
.. nonce: d5LOJv
.. section: Library

Fix TypeError on "setup.py upload --show-response".

..

.. bpo: 12226
.. date: 9854
.. nonce: -vXCBM
.. section: Library

HTTPS is now used by default when connecting to PyPI.

..

.. bpo: 20045
.. date: 9853
.. nonce: fdKDSA
.. section: Library

Fix "setup.py register --list-classifiers".

..

.. bpo: 18879
.. date: 9852
.. nonce: CEiozo
.. section: Library

When a method is looked up on a temporary file, avoid closing the file
before the method is possibly called.

..

.. bpo: 20034
.. date: 9851
.. nonce: GlYpNX
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping to most recent locale.alias file from X.org
distribution using makelocalealias.py.

..

.. bpo: 5815
.. date: 9850
.. nonce: FxSb0P
.. section: Library

Fixed support for locales with modifiers.  Fixed support for locale
encodings with hyphens.

..

.. bpo: 20026
.. date: 9849
.. nonce: KO1jB6
.. section: Library

Fix the sqlite module to handle correctly invalid isolation level (wrong
type).

..

.. bpo: 18829
.. date: 9848
.. nonce: QPwJFn
.. section: Library

csv.Dialect() now checks type for delimiter, escapechar and quotechar
fields.  Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19855
.. date: 9847
.. nonce: TtBUO6
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() on Unix now looks on the PATH for the executables used to
find the mac address, with /sbin and /usr/sbin as fallbacks.

..

.. bpo: 20007
.. date: 9846
.. nonce: IaSnPo
.. section: Library

HTTPResponse.read(0) no more prematurely closes connection. Original patch
by Simon Sapin.

..

.. bpo: 19912
.. date: 9845
.. nonce: TviIPi
.. section: Library

Fixed numerous bugs in ntpath.splitunc().

..

.. bpo: 19911
.. date: 9844
.. nonce: w1QmnT
.. section: Library

ntpath.splitdrive() now correctly processes the 'İ' character (U+0130, LATIN
CAPITAL LETTER I WITH DOT ABOVE).

..

.. bpo: 19532
.. date: 9843
.. nonce: vCt7bh
.. section: Library

python -m compileall with no filename/directory arguments now respects the
-f and -q flags instead of ignoring them.

..

.. bpo: 19623
.. date: 9842
.. nonce: zv4rIL
.. section: Library

Fixed writing to unseekable files in the aifc module.

..

.. bpo: 17919
.. date: 9841
.. nonce: H5iGXv
.. section: Library

select.poll.register() again works with poll.POLLNVAL on AIX. Fixed integer
overflow in the eventmask parameter.

..

.. bpo: 19063
.. date: 9840
.. nonce: wHlI9-
.. section: Library

if a Charset's body_encoding was set to None, the email package would
generate a message claiming the Content-Transfer-Encoding was 7bit, and
produce garbage output for the content.  This now works. A couple of other
set_payload mishandlings of non-ASCII are also fixed.

..

.. bpo: 17200
.. date: 9839
.. nonce: h7y9mA
.. section: Library

telnetlib's read_until and expect timeout was broken by the fix to Issue
#14635 in Python 3.3.0 to be interpreted as milliseconds instead of seconds
when the platform supports select.poll (ie: everywhere). It is now treated
as seconds once again.

..

.. bpo: 17429
.. date: 9838
.. nonce: dlZP0_
.. section: Library

platform.linux_distribution() now decodes files from the UTF-8 encoding with
the surrogateescape error handler, instead of decoding from the locale
encoding in strict mode. It fixes the function on Fedora 19 which is
probably the first major distribution release with a non-ASCII name. Patch
written by Toshio Kuratomi.

..

.. bpo: 19929
.. date: 9837
.. nonce: BZDeEj
.. section: Library

Call os.read with 32768 within subprocess.Popen.communicate rather than 4096
for efficiency.  A microbenchmark shows Linux and OS X both using ~50% less
cpu time this way.

..

.. bpo: 19506
.. date: 9836
.. nonce: GteUMC
.. section: Library

Use a memoryview to avoid a data copy when piping data to stdin within
subprocess.Popen.communicate.  5-10% less cpu usage.

..

.. bpo: 19839
.. date: 9835
.. nonce: qfP0k5
.. section: Library

Fix regression in bz2 module's handling of non-bzip2 data at EOF, and
analogous bug in lzma module.

..

.. bpo: 19138
.. date: 9834
.. nonce: xwKrX_
.. section: Library

doctest's IGNORE_EXCEPTION_DETAIL now allows a match when no exception
detail exists (no colon following the exception's name, or a colon does
follow but no text follows the colon).

..

.. bpo: 19834
.. date: 9833
.. nonce: rlFmTq
.. section: Library

Support unpickling of exceptions pickled by Python 2.

..

.. bpo: 15798
.. date: 9832
.. nonce: 1bxNCP
.. section: Library

Fixed subprocess.Popen() to no longer fail if file descriptor 0, 1 or 2 is
closed.

..

.. bpo: 19088
.. date: 9831
.. nonce: JBKVzp
.. section: Library

Fixed incorrect caching of the copyreg module in object.__reduce__() and
object.__reduce_ex__().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9830
.. nonce: UKWITk
.. section: Library

Fixed _pickle.Unpickler to not fail when loading empty strings as persistent
IDs.

..

.. bpo: 11480
.. date: 9829
.. nonce: qkIZLG
.. section: Library

Fixed copy.copy to work with classes with custom metaclasses. Patch by
Daniel Urban.

..

.. bpo: 6477
.. date: 9828
.. nonce: nK1lHr
.. section: Library

Added support for pickling the types of built-in singletons (i.e., Ellipsis,
NotImplemented, None).

..

.. bpo: 11508
.. date: 9827
.. nonce: fx7Abs
.. section: Library

Fixed uuid.getnode() and uuid.uuid1() on environment with virtual interface.
Original patch by Kent Frazier.

..

.. bpo: 11489
.. date: 9826
.. nonce: 3ZQHi8
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now accepts lone surrogates.

..

.. bpo: 19545
.. date: 9825
.. nonce: 1FBY5Z
.. section: Library

Avoid chained exceptions while passing stray % to time.strptime().  Initial
patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19633
.. date: 9824
.. nonce: XJNQit
.. section: Library

Fixed writing not compressed 16- and 32-bit wave files on big-endian
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19449
.. date: 9823
.. nonce: F2TbC_
.. section: Library

in csv's writerow, handle non-string keys when generating the error message
that certain keys are not in the 'fieldnames' list.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9822
.. nonce: -1Tvel
.. section: Library

Fix test.support.bind_port() to not cause an error when Python was compiled
on a system with SO_REUSEPORT defined in the headers but run on a system
with an OS kernel that does not support that reasonably new socket option.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9821
.. nonce: pmUthH
.. section: Library

Fix compilation error under gcc of the ctypes module bundled libffi for arm.

..

.. bpo: 19523
.. date: 9820
.. nonce: tNiY9i
.. section: Library

Closed FileHandler leak which occurred when delay was set.

..

.. bpo: 13674
.. date: 9819
.. nonce: EIYe4u
.. section: Library

Prevented time.strftime from crashing on Windows when given a year before
1900 and a format of %y.

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 9818
.. nonce: NJk1xH
.. section: Library

Restore use of urllib over http allowing use of http_proxy for Distutils
upload command, a feature accidentally lost in the rollback of distutils2.
(See also: bpo-6286)

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 9817
.. nonce: ZtCJGn
.. section: Library

Restore the read_pkg_file method to distutils.dist.DistributionMetadata
accidentally removed in the undo of distutils2. (See also: bpo-7457)

..

.. bpo: 1575020
.. date: 9816
.. nonce: skWyvl
.. section: Library

Fixed support of 24-bit wave files on big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19480
.. date: 9815
.. nonce: MY3dmW
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now accepts all valid start-tag names as defined by the HTML5
standard.

..

.. bpo: 6157
.. date: 9814
.. nonce: nyPil6
.. section: Library

Fixed tkinter.Text.debug().  Original patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 6160
.. date: 9813
.. nonce: Mr5UuA
.. section: Library

The bbox() method of tkinter.Spinbox now returns a tuple of integers instead
of a string.  Based on patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 10197
.. date: 9812
.. nonce: KLAKC8
.. section: Library

Rework subprocess.get[status]output to use subprocess functionality and thus
to work on Windows. Patch by Nick Coghlan.

..

.. bpo: 19286
.. date: 9811
.. nonce: TUZetF
.. section: Library

Directories in ``package_data`` are no longer added to the filelist,
preventing failure outlined in the ticket.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 9810
.. nonce: 9m6ZhV
.. section: IDLE

Add Python version to Idle editor window title bar. Original patches by
Edmond Burnett and Kent Johnson.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 9809
.. nonce: d87SuA
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now ignores the source encoding declaration on the second line if the
first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 20058
.. date: 9808
.. nonce: KnDlhH
.. section: IDLE

sys.stdin.readline() in IDLE now always returns only one line.

..

.. bpo: 19481
.. date: 9807
.. nonce: BNkHOm
.. section: IDLE

print() of string subclass instance in IDLE no longer hangs.

..

.. bpo: 18270
.. date: 9806
.. nonce: lu6dRW
.. section: IDLE

Prevent possible IDLE AttributeError on OS X when no initial shell window is
present.

..

.. bpo: 19804
.. date: 9805
.. nonce: xIHIl7
.. section: Tests

The test_find_mac test in test_uuid is now skipped if the ifconfig
executable is not available.

..

.. bpo: 19886
.. date: 9804
.. nonce: nqDFRC
.. section: Tests

Use better estimated memory requirements for bigmem tests.

..

.. bpo: 20055
.. date: 9803
.. nonce: iE7yU6
.. section: Tests

Fix test_shutil under Windows with symlink privileges held. Patch by
Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19938
.. date: 9802
.. nonce: 2iLiKJ
.. section: Tests

Re-enabled test_bug_1333982 in test_dis, which had been disabled since 3.0
due to the changes in listcomp handling.

..

.. bpo: 19320
.. date: 9801
.. nonce: 9x_cw5
.. section: Tests

test_tcl no longer fails when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19683
.. date: 9800
.. nonce: TzV2Lu
.. section: Tests

Removed empty tests from test_minidom.  Patch by Ajitesh Gupta.

..

.. bpo: 19919
.. date: 9799
.. nonce: N9bnWv
.. section: Tests

Fix flaky SSL test. connect_ex() sometimes returns EWOULDBLOCK on Windows or
VMs hosted on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 19912
.. date: 9798
.. nonce: NmE9ZX
.. section: Tests

Added tests for ntpath.splitunc().

..

.. bpo: 19828
.. date: 9797
.. nonce: f5HrFG
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_site when the whole suite is run with -S.

..

.. bpo: 19928
.. date: 9796
.. nonce: dwOQ95
.. section: Tests

Implemented a test for repr() of cell objects.

..

.. bpo: 19535
.. date: 9795
.. nonce: YdFFKB
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_docxmlrpc when python is run with -OO.

..

.. bpo: 19926
.. date: 9794
.. nonce: fkWjtw
.. section: Tests

Removed unneeded test_main from test_abstract_numbers. Patch by Vajrasky
Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19595
.. date: 9793
.. nonce: q5oNE_
.. section: Tests

Re-enabled a long-disabled test in test_winsound. (See also: bpo-19987)

..

.. bpo: 19588
.. date: 9792
.. nonce: EXKxpC
.. section: Tests

Fixed tests in test_random that were silently skipped most of the time.
Patch by Julian Gindi.

..

.. bpo: 19596
.. date: 9791
.. nonce: fxn7GZ
.. section: Tests

Set untestable tests in test_importlib to None to avoid reporting success on
empty tests.

..

.. bpo: 19440
.. date: 9790
.. nonce: ub9rs2
.. section: Tests

Clean up test_capi by removing an unnecessary __future__ import, converting
from test_main to unittest.main, and running the _testcapi module tests
within a unittest TestCase.

..

.. bpo: 18702
.. date: 9789
.. nonce: a2jP-V
.. section: Tests

All skipped tests now reported as skipped. (See also: bpo-19572)

..

.. bpo: 19085
.. date: 9788
.. nonce: Gcl9XX
.. section: Tests

Added basic tests for all tkinter widget options.

..

.. bpo: 20265
.. date: 9787
.. nonce: J7Xxm7
.. section: Documentation

Updated some parts of the Using Windows document.

..

.. bpo: 20266
.. date: 9786
.. nonce: CieiXa
.. section: Documentation

Updated some parts of the Windows FAQ.

..

.. bpo: 20255
.. date: 9785
.. nonce: SnYjEP
.. section: Documentation

Updated the about and bugs pages.

..

.. bpo: 20253
.. date: 9784
.. nonce: nbp6uJ
.. section: Documentation

Fixed a typo in the ipaddress docs that advertised an illegal attribute
name.  Found by INADA Naoki.

..

.. bpo: 19963
.. date: 9783
.. nonce: AQzmFb
.. section: Documentation

Document that importlib.import_module() no longer requires importing parent
packages separately.

..

.. bpo: 18840
.. date: 9782
.. nonce: _2UItV
.. section: Documentation

Introduce the json module in the tutorial, and de-emphasize the pickle
module.

..

.. bpo: 19845
.. date: 9781
.. nonce: luj-oI
.. section: Documentation

Updated the Compiling Python on Windows section.

..

.. bpo: 19795
.. date: 9780
.. nonce: z5sbe1
.. section: Documentation

Improved markup of True/False constants.

..

.. bpo: 18326
.. date: 9779
.. nonce: juaetA
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that list.sort's arguments are keyword-only.  Also, attempt to
reduce confusion in the glossary by not saying there are different "types"
of arguments and parameters.

..

.. bpo: 19788
.. date: 9778
.. nonce: P7qrFB
.. section: Build

kill_python(_d).exe is now run as a PreBuildEvent on the pythoncore sub-
project.  This should prevent build errors due a previous build's
python(_d).exe still running.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9777
.. nonce: uI77cH
.. section: Build

Add workaround for VS 2010 nmake clean issue. VS 2010 doesn't set up PATH
for nmake.exe correctly.

..

.. bpo: 19936
.. date: 9776
.. nonce: 742jPM
.. section: Tools/Demos

Added executable bits or shebang lines to Python scripts which requires
them.  Disable executable bits and shebang lines in test and benchmark files
in order to prevent using a random system python, and in source files of
modules which don't provide command line interface.  Fixed shebang line to
use python3 executable in the unittestgui script.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 9775
.. nonce: vONLqA
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now ignore the source encoding
declaration on the second line if the first line contains anything except a
comment.
