.. bpo: 20588
.. date: 9935
.. nonce: Yibtu_
.. release date: 23-Feb-2014
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make Python-ast.c C89 compliant.

..

.. bpo: 20437
.. date: 9934
.. nonce: FBHikT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed 21 potential bugs when deleting objects references.

..

.. bpo: 20538
.. date: 9933
.. nonce: y8iuUe
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-7 incremental decoder produced inconsistant string when input was
truncated in BASE64 section.

..

.. bpo: 20635
.. date: 9932
.. nonce: ZKwOpn
.. section: Library

Fixed grid_columnconfigure() and grid_rowconfigure() methods of Tkinter
widgets to work in wantobjects=True mode.

..

.. bpo: 19612
.. date: 9931
.. nonce: a9Cqgv
.. section: Library

On Windows, subprocess.Popen.communicate() now ignores OSError(22, 'Invalid
argument') when writing input data into stdin, whereas the process already
exited.

..

.. bpo: 6815
.. date: 9930
.. nonce: ocyEc2
.. section: Library

os.path.expandvars() now supports non-ASCII environment variables names and
values.

..

.. bpo: 17671
.. date: 9929
.. nonce: 8tHRKJ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash when use non-initialized io.BufferedRWPair. Based on patch by
Stephen Tu.

..

.. bpo: 8478
.. date: 9928
.. nonce: OS7q1h
.. section: Library

Untokenizer.compat processes first token from iterator input. Patch based on
lines from Georg Brandl, Eric Snow, and Gareth Rees.

..

.. bpo: 20594
.. date: 9927
.. nonce: BVHxPd
.. section: Library

Avoid name clash with the libc function posix_close.

..

.. bpo: 19856
.. date: 9926
.. nonce: jFhYW_
.. section: Library

shutil.move() failed to move a directory to other directory on Windows if
source name ends with os.altsep.

..

.. bpo: 14983
.. date: 9925
.. nonce: H_gs8w
.. section: Library

email.generator now always adds a line end after each MIME boundary marker,
instead of doing so only when there is an epilogue.  This fixes an RFC
compliance bug and solves an issue with signed MIME parts.

..

.. bpo: 20540
.. date: 9924
.. nonce: rhK6IW
.. section: Library

Fix a performance regression (vs. Python 3.2) when layering a
multiprocessing Connection over a TCP socket.  For small payloads, Nagle's
algorithm would introduce idle delays before the entire transmission of a
message.

..

.. bpo: 16983
.. date: 9923
.. nonce: MoPgVQ
.. section: Library

the new email header parsing code will now decode encoded words that are
(incorrectly) surrounded by quotes, and register a defect.

..

.. bpo: 19772
.. date: 9922
.. nonce: pRi-Hm
.. section: Library

email.generator no longer mutates the message object when doing a down-
transform from 8bit to 7bit CTEs.

..

.. bpo: 18805
.. date: 9921
.. nonce: fBdyY2
.. section: Library

the netmask/hostmask parsing in ipaddress now more reliably filters out
illegal values and correctly allows any valid prefix length.

..

.. bpo: 17369
.. date: 9920
.. nonce: ZBFAd4
.. section: Library

get_filename was raising an exception if the filename parameter's RFC2231
encoding was broken in certain ways.  This was a regression relative to
python2.

..

.. bpo: 20013
.. date: 9919
.. nonce: erNy8V
.. section: Library

Some imap servers disconnect if the current mailbox is deleted, and imaplib
did not handle that case gracefully.  Now it handles the 'bye' correctly.

..

.. bpo: 19920
.. date: 9918
.. nonce: _fEm-X
.. section: Library

TarFile.list() no longer fails when outputs a listing containing non-
encodable characters.  Based on patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 20515
.. date: 9917
.. nonce: JrEnar
.. section: Library

Fix NULL pointer dereference introduced by issue #20368.

..

.. bpo: 19186
.. date: 9916
.. nonce: cuiicK
.. section: Library

Restore namespacing of expat symbols inside the pyexpat module.

..

.. bpo: 20426
.. date: 9915
.. nonce: f0ozAP
.. section: Library

When passing the re.DEBUG flag, re.compile() displays the debug output every
time it is called, regardless of the compilation cache.

..

.. bpo: 20368
.. date: 9914
.. nonce: I8sm7u
.. section: Library

The null character now correctly passed from Tcl to Python. Improved error
handling in variables-related commands.

..

.. bpo: 20435
.. date: 9913
.. nonce: _UNhlH
.. section: Library

Fix _pyio.StringIO.getvalue() to take into account newline translation
settings.

..

.. bpo: 20288
.. date: 9912
.. nonce: 6zUZe3
.. section: Library

fix handling of invalid numeric charrefs in HTMLParser.

..

.. bpo: 20424
.. date: 9911
.. nonce: deh6LJ
.. section: Library

Python implementation of io.StringIO now supports lone surrogates.

..

.. bpo: 19456
.. date: 9910
.. nonce: 6HhsFx
.. section: Library

ntpath.join() now joins relative paths correctly when a drive is present.

..

.. bpo: 19077
.. date: 9909
.. nonce: 9caMa1
.. section: Library

tempfile.TemporaryDirectory cleanup is now most likely successful when
called during nulling out of modules during shutdown. Misleading exception
no longer raised when resource warning is emitted during shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 20367
.. date: 9908
.. nonce: K0bFqf
.. section: Library

Fix behavior of concurrent.futures.as_completed() for duplicate arguments.
Patch by Glenn Langford.

..

.. bpo: 8260
.. date: 9907
.. nonce: nf7gg9
.. section: Library

The read(), readline() and readlines() methods of codecs.StreamReader
returned incomplete data when were called after readline() or read(size).
Based on patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 20406
.. date: 9906
.. nonce: AgBe_5
.. section: IDLE

Use Python application icons for Idle window title bars. Patch mostly by
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9905
.. nonce: xLVABp
.. section: IDLE

Update the python.gif icon for the Idle classbrowser and pathbowser from the
old green snake to the new new blue and yellow snakes.

..

.. bpo: 17721
.. date: 9904
.. nonce: 8Jh8C1
.. section: IDLE

Remove non-functional configuration dialog help button until we make it
actually gives some help when clicked. Patch by Guilherme Simões.

..

.. bpo: 20510
.. date: 9903
.. nonce: GzYa0u
.. section: Tests

Rewrote test_exit in test_sys to match existing comments, use modern
unittest features, and use helpers from test.script_helper instead of using
subprocess directly.  Patch by Gareth Rees.

..

.. bpo: 20532
.. date: 9902
.. nonce: 9diHQp
.. section: Tests

Tests which use _testcapi are now marked as CPython only.

..

.. bpo: 19920
.. date: 9901
.. nonce: suOIC7
.. section: Tests

Added tests for TarFile.list().  Based on patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19990
.. date: 9900
.. nonce: Lp1MVj
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the imghdr module.  Based on patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 20474
.. date: 9899
.. nonce: Jm7xrk
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket "unexpected success" failures on OS X 10.7+.

..

.. bpo: 20605
.. date: 9898
.. nonce: uef5pT
.. section: Tests

Make test_socket getaddrinfo OS X segfault test more robust.

..

.. bpo: 20488
.. date: 9897
.. nonce: Rizc04
.. section: Documentation

Importlib is no longer *an* implementation of import, it's *the*
implementation.

..

.. bpo: 20221
.. date: 9896
.. nonce: _yAetK
.. section: Build

Removed conflicting (or circular) hypot definition when compiled with VS
2010 or above.  Initial patch by Tabrez Mohammed.

..

.. bpo: 20609
.. date: 9895
.. nonce: IMbrDQ
.. section: Build

Restored the ability to build 64-bit Windows binaries on 32-bit Windows,
which was broken by the change in issue #19788.
