.. bpo: 22643
.. date: 9966
.. nonce: xv8xev
.. release date: 11-Oct-2014
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow in Unicode case operations (upper, lower, title,
swapcase, casefold).

..

.. bpo: 22518
.. date: 9965
.. nonce: igrgN2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed integer overflow issues in "backslashreplace", "xmlcharrefreplace",
and "surrogatepass" error handlers.

..

.. bpo: 22520
.. date: 9964
.. nonce: ZPJXSq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking when generating the repr of a unicode object.

..

.. bpo: 22519
.. date: 9963
.. nonce: xvJVg0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking in PyBytes_Repr.

..

.. bpo: 22518
.. date: 9962
.. nonce: C9T6ed
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow issues in latin-1 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 23165
.. date: 9961
.. nonce: lk8uCE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Perform overflow checks before allocating memory in the _Py_char2wchar
function.

..

.. bpo: 16043
.. date: 9960
.. nonce: TGIC7t
.. section: Library

Add a default limit for the amount of data xmlrpclib.gzip_decode will
return. This resolves CVE-2013-1753.

..

.. bpo: 22517
.. date: 9959
.. nonce: SOfMig
.. section: Library

When a io.BufferedRWPair object is deallocated, clear its weakrefs.

..

.. bpo: 22419
.. date: 9958
.. nonce: FqH4aC
.. section: Library

Limit the length of incoming HTTP request in wsgiref server to 65536 bytes
and send a 414 error code for higher lengths. Patch contributed by Devin
Cook.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9957
.. nonce: y7r3O2
.. section: Library

Lax cookie parsing in http.cookies could be a security issue when combined
with non-standard cookie handling in some Web browsers.  Reported by Sergey
Bobrov.

..

.. bpo: 21766
.. date: 9956
.. nonce: 0xk_xC
.. section: Library

Prevent a security hole in CGIHTTPServer by URL unquoting paths before
checking for a CGI script at that path.

..

.. bpo: 20633
.. date: 9955
.. nonce: 6kaPjT
.. section: Library

Replace relative import by absolute import.

..

.. bpo: 21082
.. date: 9954
.. nonce: GLzGlV
.. section: Library

In os.makedirs, do not set the process-wide umask. Note this changes
behavior of makedirs when exist_ok=True.

..

.. bpo: 20875
.. date: 9953
.. nonce: IjfI5V
.. section: Library

Prevent possible gzip "'read' is not defined" NameError. Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 11599
.. date: 9952
.. nonce: 9QOXf4
.. section: Library

When an external command (e.g. compiler) fails, distutils now prints out the
whole command line (instead of just the command name) if the environment
variable DISTUTILS_DEBUG is set.

..

.. bpo: 4931
.. date: 9951
.. nonce: uF10hr
.. section: Library

distutils should not produce unhelpful "error: None" messages anymore.
distutils.util.grok_environment_error is kept but doc-deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 20283
.. date: 9950
.. nonce: v0Vs9V
.. section: Library

RE pattern methods now accept the string keyword parameters as documented.
The pattern and source keyword parameters are left as deprecated aliases.

..

.. bpo: 21323
.. date: 9949
.. nonce: quiWfl
.. section: Library

Fix http.server to again handle scripts in CGI subdirectories, broken by the
fix for security issue #19435.  Patch by Zach Byrne.

..

.. bpo: 21529
.. date: 9948
.. nonce: 57R_Fc
.. section: Library

Fix arbitrary memory access in JSONDecoder.raw_decode with a negative second
parameter. Bug reported by Guido Vranken. (See also: CVE-2014-4616)

..

.. bpo: 17752
.. date: 9947
.. nonce: P8iG44
.. section: Tests

Fix distutils tests when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 20946
.. date: 9946
.. nonce: iI4MlK
.. section: Tests

Correct alignment assumptions of some ctypes tests.

..

.. bpo: 20939
.. date: 9945
.. nonce: MX5O4e
.. section: Tests

Fix test_geturl failure in test_urllibnet due to new redirect of
http://www.python.org/ to https://www.python.org.
