.. bpo: 13992
.. date: 7979
.. nonce: NtESXo
.. release date: 09-Sep-2012
.. section: Core and Builtins

The trashcan mechanism is now thread-safe.  This eliminates sporadic crashes
in multi-thread programs when several long deallocator chains ran
concurrently and involved subclasses of built-in container types.

..

.. bpo: 15784
.. date: 7978
.. nonce: zeVMus
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify `OSError`.__str__() to better distinguish between errno error numbers
and Windows error numbers.

..

.. bpo: 15781
.. date: 7977
.. nonce: kNkd0Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix two small race conditions in import's module locking.

..

.. bpo: 17158
.. date: 7976
.. nonce: vU3389
.. section: Library

Add 'symbols' to help() welcome message; clarify 'modules spam' messages.

..

.. bpo: 15847
.. date: 7975
.. nonce: kB0FUD
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in argparse, which did not accept tuples as argument lists
anymore.

..

.. bpo: 15828
.. date: 7974
.. nonce: EW3Br7
.. section: Library

Restore support for C extensions in `imp.load_module()`.

..

.. bpo: 15340
.. date: 7973
.. nonce: ThJxoy
.. section: Library

Fix importing the random module when ``/dev/urandom`` cannot be opened.
This was a regression caused by the hash randomization patch.

..

.. bpo: 10650
.. date: 7972
.. nonce: FImkq4
.. section: Library

Deprecate the watchexp parameter of the `Decimal.quantize()` method.

..

.. bpo: 15785
.. date: 7971
.. nonce: VZfOJY
.. section: Library

Modify `window.get_wch()` API of the curses module: return a character for
most keys, and an integer for special keys, instead of always returning an
integer. So it is now possible to distinguish special keys like keypad keys.

..

.. bpo: 14223
.. date: 7970
.. nonce: oVuUDj
.. section: Library

Fix `window.addch()` of the curses module for special characters like
curses.ACS_HLINE: the Python function addch(int) and addch(bytes) is now
calling the C function waddch()/mvwaddch() (as it was done in Python 3.2),
instead of wadd_wch()/mvwadd_wch(). The Python function addch(str) is still
calling the C function wadd_wch()/mvwadd_wch() if the Python curses is
linked to libncursesw.

..

.. bpo: 15822
.. date: 7969
.. nonce: SNlKd9
.. section: Build

Really ensure 2to3 grammar pickles are properly installed (replaces fixes
for Issue #15645).

..

.. bpo: 15814
.. date: 7968
.. nonce: JleLly
.. section: Documentation

The memoryview enhancements in 3.3.0 accidentally permitted the hashing of
multi-dimensional memorviews and memoryviews with multi-byte item formats.
The intended restrictions have now been documented - they will be correctly
enforced in 3.3.1.
