.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8065
.. nonce: HZ3bne
.. release date: 2013-11-24
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use the repr of a module name in more places in import, especially
exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 19619
.. date: 8064
.. nonce: p4mly-
.. section: Core and Builtins

str.encode, bytes.decode and bytearray.decode now use an internal API to
throw LookupError for known non-text encodings, rather than attempting the
encoding or decoding operation and then throwing a TypeError for an
unexpected output type. (The latter mechanism remains in place for third
party non-text encodings)

..

.. bpo: 19183
.. date: 8063
.. nonce: uRQl7Q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 456 'secure and interchangeable hash algorithm'. Python now
uses SipHash24 on all major platforms.

..

.. bpo: 12892
.. date: 8062
.. nonce: TBN6AI
.. section: Core and Builtins

The utf-16* and utf-32* encoders no longer allow surrogate code points
(U+D800-U+DFFF) to be encoded.  The utf-32* decoders no longer decode byte
sequences that correspond to surrogate code points.  The surrogatepass error
handler now works with the utf-16* and utf-32* codecs.  Based on patches by
Victor Stinner and Kang-Hao (Kenny) Lu.

..

.. bpo: 17806
.. date: 8061
.. nonce: Mkg_9s
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added keyword-argument support for "tabsize" to str/bytes.expandtabs().

..

.. bpo: 17828
.. date: 8060
.. nonce: -sD57u
.. section: Core and Builtins

Output type errors in str.encode(), bytes.decode() and bytearray.decode()
now direct users to codecs.encode() or codecs.decode() as appropriate.

..

.. bpo: 17828
.. date: 8059
.. nonce: k-Stau
.. section: Core and Builtins

The interpreter now attempts to chain errors that occur in codec processing
with a replacement exception of the same type that includes the codec name
in the error message. It ensures it only does this when the creation of the
replacement exception won't lose any information.

..

.. bpo: 19466
.. date: 8058
.. nonce: QjlDnq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Clear the frames of daemon threads earlier during the Python shutdown to
call object destructors. So "unclosed file" resource warnings are now
correctly emitted for daemon threads.

..

.. bpo: 19514
.. date: 8057
.. nonce: FfR4kF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deduplicate some _Py_IDENTIFIER declarations. Patch by Andrei Dorian Duma.

..

.. bpo: 17936
.. date: 8056
.. nonce: Vva8kQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix O(n**2) behaviour when adding or removing many subclasses of a given
type.

..

.. bpo: 19428
.. date: 8055
.. nonce: wN6Oyz
.. section: Core and Builtins

zipimport now handles errors when reading truncated or invalid ZIP archive.

..

.. bpo: 18408
.. date: 8054
.. nonce: IDTlVz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new PyFrame_FastToLocalsWithError() function to handle exceptions when
merging fast locals into f_locals of a frame. PyEval_GetLocals() now raises
an exception and return NULL on failure.

..

.. bpo: 19369
.. date: 8053
.. nonce: 19W2nG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimized the usage of __length_hint__().

..

.. bpo: 18603
.. date: 8052
.. nonce: 7SMyAQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure that PyOS_mystricmp and PyOS_mystrnicmp are in the Python executable
and not removed by the linker's optimizer.

..

.. bpo: 19306
.. date: 8051
.. nonce: PYfqS6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add extra hints to the faulthandler module's stack dumps that these are
"upside down".

..

.. bpo: 3158
.. date: 8050
.. nonce: Uuris9
.. section: Library

doctest can now find doctests in functions and methods written in C.

..

.. bpo: 13477
.. date: 8049
.. nonce: KYiO6P
.. section: Library

Added command line interface to the tarfile module. Original patch by Berker
Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 19674
.. date: 8048
.. nonce: wDLXgw
.. section: Library

inspect.signature() now produces a correct signature for some builtins.

..

.. bpo: 19722
.. date: 8047
.. nonce: pZvdfi
.. section: Library

Added opcode.stack_effect(), which computes the stack effect of bytecode
instructions.

..

.. bpo: 19735
.. date: 8046
.. nonce: 4JGp9S
.. section: Library

Implement private function ssl._create_stdlib_context() to create SSLContext
objects in Python's stdlib module. It provides a single configuration point
and makes use of SSLContext.load_default_certs().

..

.. bpo: 16203
.. date: 8045
.. nonce: Obg29F
.. section: Library

Add re.fullmatch() function and regex.fullmatch() method, which anchor the
pattern at both ends of the string to match. Original patch by Matthew
Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 13592
.. date: 8044
.. nonce: LI-pVN
.. section: Library

Improved the repr for regular expression pattern objects. Based on patch by
Hugo Lopes Tavares.

..

.. bpo: 19641
.. date: 8043
.. nonce: S_oEqp
.. section: Library

Added the audioop.byteswap() function to convert big-endian samples to
little-endian and vice versa.

..

.. bpo: 15204
.. date: 8042
.. nonce: bICOJc
.. section: Library

Deprecated the 'U' mode in file-like objects.

..

.. bpo: 17810
.. date: 8041
.. nonce: eJrPc5
.. section: Library

Implement PEP 3154, pickle protocol 4.

..

.. bpo: 19668
.. date: 8040
.. nonce: e177xD
.. section: Library

Added support for the cp1125 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 19689
.. date: 8039
.. nonce: ucsUkZ
.. section: Library

Add ssl.create_default_context() factory function. It creates a new
SSLContext object with secure default settings.

..

.. bpo: 19727
.. date: 8038
.. nonce: 7z890j
.. section: Library

os.utime(..., None) is now potentially more precise under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17201
.. date: 8037
.. nonce: x3oEjg
.. section: Library

ZIP64 extensions now are enabled by default.  Patch by William Mallard.

..

.. bpo: 19292
.. date: 8036
.. nonce: SRsZqK
.. section: Library

Add SSLContext.load_default_certs() to load default root CA certificates
from default stores or system stores. By default the method loads CA certs
for authentication of server certs.

..

.. bpo: 19673
.. date: 8035
.. nonce: cbMrgH
.. section: Library

Add pathlib to the stdlib as a provisional module (PEP 428).

..

.. bpo: 16596
.. date: 8034
.. nonce: Fk4mD0
.. section: Library

pdb in a generator now properly skips over yield and yield from rather than
stepping out of the generator into its caller.  (This is essential for
stepping through asyncio coroutines.)

..

.. bpo: 17916
.. date: 8033
.. nonce: NhM62k
.. section: Library

Added dis.Bytecode.from_traceback() and dis.Bytecode.current_offset to
easily display "current instruction" markers in the new disassembly API
(Patch by Claudiu Popa).

..

.. bpo: 19552
.. date: 8032
.. nonce: YLwRGR
.. section: Library

venv now supports bootstrapping pip into virtual environments

..

.. bpo: 17134
.. date: 8031
.. nonce: 59bg3U
.. section: Library

Finalize interface to Windows' certificate store. Cert and CRL enumeration
are now two functions. enum_certificates() also returns purpose flags as set
of OIDs.

..

.. bpo: 19555
.. date: 8030
.. nonce: Cl1wp9
.. section: Library

Restore sysconfig.get_config_var('SO'), (and the distutils equivalent) with
a DeprecationWarning pointing people at $EXT_SUFFIX.

..

.. bpo: 8813
.. date: 8029
.. nonce: eOLgxE
.. section: Library

Add SSLContext.verify_flags to change the verification flags of the context
in order to enable certification revocation list (CRL) checks or strict X509
rules.

..

.. bpo: 18294
.. date: 8028
.. nonce: hCjVbY
.. section: Library

Fix the zlib module to make it 64-bit safe.

..

.. bpo: 19682
.. date: 8027
.. nonce: Ruo2jD
.. section: Library

Fix compatibility issue with old version of OpenSSL that was introduced by
Issue #18379.

..

.. bpo: 14455
.. date: 8026
.. nonce: p3C8TR
.. section: Library

plistlib now supports binary plists and has an updated API.

..

.. bpo: 19633
.. date: 8025
.. nonce: XJNQit
.. section: Library

Fixed writing not compressed 16- and 32-bit wave files on big-endian
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 18379
.. date: 8024
.. nonce: 6MEkk8
.. section: Library

SSLSocket.getpeercert() returns CA issuer AIA fields, OCSP and CRL
distribution points.

..

.. bpo: 18138
.. date: 8023
.. nonce: Xt0I1D
.. section: Library

Implement cadata argument of SSLContext.load_verify_location() to load CA
certificates and CRL from memory. It supports PEM and DER encoded strings.

..

.. bpo: 18775
.. date: 8022
.. nonce: Q0s2iT
.. section: Library

Add name and block_size attribute to HMAC object. They now provide the same
API elements as non-keyed cryptographic hash functions.

..

.. bpo: 17276
.. date: 8021
.. nonce: Rusj_j
.. section: Library

MD5 as default digestmod for HMAC is deprecated. The HMAC module supports
digestmod names, e.g. hmac.HMAC('sha1').

..

.. bpo: 19449
.. date: 8020
.. nonce: F2TbC_
.. section: Library

in csv's writerow, handle non-string keys when generating the error message
that certain keys are not in the 'fieldnames' list.

..

.. bpo: 13633
.. date: 8019
.. nonce: 1AJC3w
.. section: Library

Added a new convert_charrefs keyword arg to HTMLParser that, when True,
automatically converts all character references.

..

.. bpo: 2927
.. date: 8018
.. nonce: 5t4wCh
.. section: Library

Added the unescape() function to the html module.

..

.. bpo: 8402
.. date: 8017
.. nonce: -VPGJN
.. section: Library

Added the escape() function to the glob module.

..

.. bpo: 17618
.. date: 8016
.. nonce: OI2l3J
.. section: Library

Add Base85 and Ascii85 encoding/decoding to the base64 module.

..

.. bpo: 19634
.. date: 8015
.. nonce: -pzaWO
.. section: Library

time.strftime("%y") now raises a ValueError on AIX when given a year before
1900.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8014
.. nonce: -1Tvel
.. section: Library

Fix test.support.bind_port() to not cause an error when Python was compiled
on a system with SO_REUSEPORT defined in the headers but run on a system
with an OS kernel that does not support that reasonably new socket option.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8013
.. nonce: pmUthH
.. section: Library

Fix compilation error under gcc of the ctypes module bundled libffi for arm.

..

.. bpo: 19448
.. date: 8012
.. nonce: oHsofd
.. section: Library

Add private API to SSL module to lookup ASN.1 objects by OID, NID, short
name and long name.

..

.. bpo: 19282
.. date: 8011
.. nonce: dDB6fB
.. section: Library

dbm.open now supports the context management protocol. (Initial patch by
Claudiu Popa)

..

.. bpo: 8311
.. date: 8010
.. nonce: 1h-XNN
.. section: Library

Added support for writing any bytes-like objects in the aifc, sunau, and
wave modules.

..

.. bpo: 5202
.. date: 8009
.. nonce: Qmv91E
.. section: Library

Added support for unseekable files in the wave module.

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 8008
.. nonce: KA-RHQ
.. section: Library

Restore global option to ignore ~/.pydistutils.cfg in Distutils,
accidentally removed in backout of distutils2 changes. (See also: bpo-1180)

..

.. bpo: 19523
.. date: 8007
.. nonce: tNiY9i
.. section: Library

Closed FileHandler leak which occurred when delay was set.

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 8006
.. nonce: vFbcTR
.. section: Library

Restore support for --user and --group parameters to sdist command
accidentally rolled back as part of the distutils2 rollback. (See also:
bpo-6516)

..

.. bpo: 13674
.. date: 8005
.. nonce: EIYe4u
.. section: Library

Prevented time.strftime from crashing on Windows when given a year before
1900 and a format of %y.

..

.. bpo: 19406
.. date: 8004
.. nonce: _vGZ47
.. section: Library

implementation of the ensurepip module (part of PEP 453). Patch by Donald
Stufft and Nick Coghlan.

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 8003
.. nonce: NJk1xH
.. section: Library

Restore use of urllib over http allowing use of http_proxy for Distutils
upload command, a feature accidentally lost in the rollback of distutils2.
(See also: bpo-6286)

..

.. bpo: 19544
.. date: 8002
.. nonce: ZtCJGn
.. section: Library

Restore the read_pkg_file method to distutils.dist.DistributionMetadata
accidentally removed in the undo of distutils2. (See also: bpo-7457)

..

.. bpo: 16685
.. date: 8001
.. nonce: qc5QWm
.. section: Library

Added support for any bytes-like objects in the audioop module. Removed
support for strings.

..

.. bpo: 7171
.. date: 8000
.. nonce: irjmxW
.. section: Library

Add Windows implementation of ``inet_ntop`` and ``inet_pton`` to socket
module. Patch by Atsuo Ishimoto.

..

.. bpo: 19261
.. date: 7999
.. nonce: MDxLbN
.. section: Library

Added support for writing 24-bit samples in the sunau module.

..

.. bpo: 1097797
.. date: 7998
.. nonce: s8FvuZ
.. section: Library

Added CP273 encoding, used on IBM mainframes in Germany and Austria.
Mapping provided by Michael Bierenfeld.

..

.. bpo: 1575020
.. date: 7997
.. nonce: skWyvl
.. section: Library

Fixed support of 24-bit wave files on big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7996
.. nonce: 1XDVqS
.. section: Library

Fixed a number of cases in the dis module where the new "file" parameter was
not being honoured correctly

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7995
.. nonce: s_AkzU
.. section: Library

Removed the "dis.Bytecode.show_info" method

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7994
.. nonce: mEYzGf
.. section: Library

Renamed the "dis.Bytecode.display_code" method to "dis.Bytecode.dis" and
converted it to returning a string rather than printing output.

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7993
.. nonce: zuYjXC
.. section: Library

the "line_offset" parameter in the new "dis.get_instructions" API has been
renamed to "first_line" (and the default value and usage changed
accordingly). This should reduce confusion with the more common use of
"offset" in the dis docs to refer to bytecode offsets.

..

.. bpo: 18678
.. date: 7992
.. nonce: 7wTha_
.. section: Library

Corrected spwd struct member names in spwd module: sp_nam->sp_namp, and
sp_pwd->sp_pwdp.  The old names are kept as extra structseq members, for
backward compatibility.

..

.. bpo: 6157
.. date: 7991
.. nonce: SpFEy2
.. section: Library

Fixed tkinter.Text.debug().  tkinter.Text.bbox() now raises TypeError
instead of TclError on wrong number of arguments.  Original patch by
Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 10197
.. date: 7990
.. nonce: 6uq2Xn
.. section: Library

Rework subprocess.get[status]output to use subprocess functionality and thus
to work on Windows. Patch by Nick Coghlan

..

.. bpo: 6160
.. date: 7989
.. nonce: Mr5UuA
.. section: Library

The bbox() method of tkinter.Spinbox now returns a tuple of integers instead
of a string.  Based on patch by Guilherme Polo.

..

.. bpo: 19403
.. date: 7988
.. nonce: rJUF8f
.. section: Library

contextlib.redirect_stdout is now reentrant

..

.. bpo: 19286
.. date: 7987
.. nonce: TUZetF
.. section: Library

Directories in ``package_data`` are no longer added to the filelist,
preventing failure outlined in the ticket.

..

.. bpo: 19480
.. date: 7986
.. nonce: MY3dmW
.. section: Library

HTMLParser now accepts all valid start-tag names as defined by the HTML5
standard.

..

.. bpo: 15114
.. date: 7985
.. nonce: MuB2Yy
.. section: Library

The html.parser module now raises a DeprecationWarning when the strict
argument of HTMLParser or the HTMLParser.error method are used.

..

.. bpo: 19410
.. date: 7984
.. nonce: OU3U4K
.. section: Library

Undo the special-casing removal of '' for importlib.machinery.FileFinder.

..

.. bpo: 19424
.. date: 7983
.. nonce: vYBdnZ
.. section: Library

Fix the warnings module to accept filename containing surrogate characters.

..

.. bpo: 19435
.. date: 7982
.. nonce: kXqMz3
.. section: Library

Fix directory traversal attack on CGIHttpRequestHandler.

..

.. bpo: 19227
.. date: 7981
.. nonce: yGdfN6
.. section: Library

Remove pthread_atfork() handler. The handler was added to solve #18747 but
has caused issues.

..

.. bpo: 19420
.. date: 7980
.. nonce: eJad_G
.. section: Library

Fix reference leak in module initialization code of _hashopenssl.c

..

.. bpo: 19329
.. date: 7979
.. nonce: f3o3tr
.. section: Library

Optimized compiling charsets in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 19227
.. date: 7978
.. nonce: -dpnbn
.. section: Library

Try to fix deadlocks caused by re-seeding then OpenSSL pseudo-random number
generator on fork().

..

.. bpo: 16037
.. date: 7977
.. nonce: cxufSm
.. section: Library

HTTPMessage.readheaders() raises an HTTPException when more than 100 headers
are read.  Adapted from patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16040
.. date: 7976
.. nonce: xg3xlX
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: nntplib: Limit maximum line lengths to 2048 to prevent
readline() calls from consuming too much memory.  Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 16041
.. date: 7975
.. nonce: XFY0lr
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: poplib: Limit maximum line lengths to 2048 to prevent
readline() calls from consuming too much memory.  Patch by Jyrki Pulliainen.

..

.. bpo: 17997
.. date: 7974
.. nonce: sJUozx
.. section: Library

Change behavior of ``ssl.match_hostname()`` to follow RFC 6125, for security
reasons.  It now doesn't match multiple wildcards nor wildcards inside IDN
fragments.

..

.. bpo: 16039
.. date: 7973
.. nonce: ipafYi
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: Change use of readline in imaplib module to limit line
length.  Patch by Emil Lind.

..

.. bpo: 19330
.. date: 7972
.. nonce: -pfViq
.. section: Library

the unnecessary wrapper functions have been removed from the implementations
of the new contextlib.redirect_stdout and contextlib.suppress context
managers, which also ensures they provide reasonable help() output on
instances

..

.. bpo: 19393
.. date: 7971
.. nonce: ytbAwl
.. section: Library

Fix symtable.symtable function to not be confused when there are functions
or classes named "top".

..

.. bpo: 18685
.. date: 7970
.. nonce: R0OJ2-
.. section: Library

Restore re performance to pre-PEP 393 levels.

..

.. bpo: 19339
.. date: 7969
.. nonce: kxMuh2
.. section: Library

telnetlib module is now using time.monotonic() when available to compute
timeout.

..

.. bpo: 19399
.. date: 7968
.. nonce: ofrcCx
.. section: Library

fix sporadic test_subprocess failure.

..

.. bpo: 13234
.. date: 7967
.. nonce: uuePvu
.. section: Library

Fix os.listdir to work with extended paths on Windows. Patch by Santoso
Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 19375
.. date: 7966
.. nonce: Kbkj5C
.. section: Library

The site module adding a "site-python" directory to sys.path, if it exists,
is now deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 19379
.. date: 7965
.. nonce: jOblDO
.. section: Library

Lazily import linecache in the warnings module, to make startup with
warnings faster until a warning gets printed.

..

.. bpo: 19288
.. date: 7964
.. nonce: nKDzgw
.. section: Library

Fixed the "in" operator of dbm.gnu databases for string argument.  Original
patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 19287
.. date: 7963
.. nonce: IVl3jY
.. section: Library

Fixed the "in" operator of dbm.ndbm databases for string argument.  Original
patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 19327
.. date: 7962
.. nonce: S7Xvxs
.. section: Library

Fixed the working of regular expressions with too big charset.

..

.. bpo: 17400
.. date: 7961
.. nonce: 8BUFmy
.. section: Library

New 'is_global' attribute for ipaddress to tell if an address is allocated
by IANA for global or private networks.

..

.. bpo: 19350
.. date: 7960
.. nonce: MCCKjK
.. section: Library

Increasing the test coverage of macurl2path. Patch by Colin Williams.

..

.. bpo: 19365
.. date: 7959
.. nonce: ZBG2Mi
.. section: Library

Optimized the parsing of long replacement string in re.sub*() functions.

..

.. bpo: 19352
.. date: 7958
.. nonce: 3TfAkY
.. section: Library

Fix unittest discovery when a module can be reached through several paths
(e.g. under Debian/Ubuntu with virtualenv).

..

.. bpo: 15207
.. date: 7957
.. nonce: piOBBi
.. section: Library

Fix mimetypes to read from correct part of Windows registry Original patch
by Dave Chambers

..

.. bpo: 16595
.. date: 7956
.. nonce: Be5Hga
.. section: Library

Add prlimit() to resource module.

..

.. bpo: 19324
.. date: 7955
.. nonce: e0cvlt
.. section: Library

Expose Linux-specific constants in resource module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7954
.. nonce: sxxiug
.. section: Library

Load SSL's error strings in hashlib.

..

.. bpo: 18527
.. date: 7953
.. nonce: fA-A37
.. section: Library

Upgrade internal copy of zlib to 1.2.8.

..

.. bpo: 19274
.. date: 7952
.. nonce: i8khqy
.. section: Library

Add a filterfunc parameter to PyZipFile.writepy.

..

.. bpo: 8964
.. date: 7951
.. nonce: dzU2FB
.. section: Library

fix platform._sys_version to handle IronPython 2.6+. Patch by Martin
Matusiak.

..

.. bpo: 19413
.. date: 7950
.. nonce: 2Niic6
.. section: Library

Restore pre-3.3 reload() semantics of re-finding modules.

..

.. bpo: 18958
.. date: 7949
.. nonce: AoIQm9
.. section: Library

Improve error message for json.load(s) while passing a string that starts
with a UTF-8 BOM.

..

.. bpo: 19307
.. date: 7948
.. nonce: iFye0G
.. section: Library

Improve error message for json.load(s) while passing objects of the wrong
type.

..

.. bpo: 16038
.. date: 7947
.. nonce: TZGbSo
.. section: Library

CVE-2013-1752: ftplib: Limit amount of data read by limiting the call to
readline().  Original patch by Michał Jastrzębski and Giampaolo Rodola.

..

.. bpo: 17087
.. date: 7946
.. nonce: A3XA7C
.. section: Library

Improved the repr for regular expression match objects.

..

.. bpo: 19664
.. date: 7945
.. nonce: Nw449E
.. section: Tests

test_userdict's repr test no longer depends on the order of dict elements.

..

.. bpo: 19440
.. date: 7944
.. nonce: BW6mI9
.. section: Tests

Clean up test_capi by removing an unnecessary __future__ import, converting
from test_main to unittest.main, and running the _testcapi module tests as
subTests of a unittest TestCase method.

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7943
.. nonce: zeWIz0
.. section: Tests

the main dis module tests are now run with both stdout redirection *and*
passing an explicit file parameter

..

.. bpo: 19378
.. date: 7942
.. nonce: MOkpfA
.. section: Tests

removed the not-actually-helpful assertInstructionMatches and
assertBytecodeExactlyMatches helpers from bytecode_helper

..

.. bpo: 18702
.. date: 7941
.. nonce: 91BEkZ
.. section: Tests

All skipped tests now reported as skipped.

..

.. bpo: 19439
.. date: 7940
.. nonce: J96-Vv
.. section: Tests

interpreter embedding tests are now executed on Windows (Patch by Zachary
Ware)

..

.. bpo: 19085
.. date: 7939
.. nonce: Gcl9XX
.. section: Tests

Added basic tests for all tkinter widget options.

..

.. bpo: 19384
.. date: 7938
.. nonce: v6r_8A
.. section: Tests

Fix test_py_compile for root user, patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18326
.. date: 7937
.. nonce: juaetA
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that list.sort's arguments are keyword-only.  Also, attempt to
reduce confusion in the glossary by not saying there are different "types"
of arguments and parameters.

..

.. bpo: 19358
.. date: 7936
.. nonce: 80ySM-
.. section: Build

"make clinic" now runs the Argument Clinic preprocessor over all CPython
source files.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7935
.. nonce: -GnKfJ
.. section: Build

Update SQLite to 3.8.1, xz to 5.0.5, and Tcl/Tk to 8.6.1 on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16632
.. date: 7934
.. nonce: BiQhFA
.. section: Build

Enable DEP and ASLR on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17791
.. date: 7933
.. nonce: fExj5r
.. section: Build

Drop PREFIX and EXEC_PREFIX definitions from PC/pyconfig.h

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7932
.. nonce: uI77cH
.. section: Build

Add workaround for VS 2010 nmake clean issue. VS 2010 doesn't set up PATH
for nmake.exe correctly.

..

.. bpo: 19550
.. date: 7931
.. nonce: MLDPnk
.. section: Build

Implement Windows installer changes of PEP 453 (ensurepip).

..

.. bpo: 19520
.. date: 7930
.. nonce: KBn7ff
.. section: Build

Fix compiler warning in the _sha3 module on 32bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 19356
.. date: 7929
.. nonce: lHamQS
.. section: Build

Avoid using a C variabled named "_self", it's a reserved word in some C
compilers.

..

.. bpo: 15792
.. date: 7928
.. nonce: Rx4fV2
.. section: Build

Correct build options on Win64. Patch by Jeremy Kloth.

..

.. bpo: 19373
.. date: 7927
.. nonce: Gxnb8v
.. section: Build

Apply upstream change to Tk 8.5.15 fixing OS X 10.9 screen refresh problem
for OS X installer build.

..

.. bpo: 19649
.. date: 7926
.. nonce: yuZ3xq
.. section: Build

On OS X, the same set of file names are now installed in bin directories for
all configurations: non-framework vs framework, and single arch vs universal
builds.  pythonx.y-32 is now always installed for 64-bit/32-bit universal
builds.  The obsolete and undocumented pythonw* symlinks are no longer
installed anywhere.

..

.. bpo: 19553
.. date: 7925
.. nonce: JY6pHm
.. section: Build

PEP 453 - "make install" and "make altinstall" now install or upgrade pip by
default, using the bundled pip provided by the new ensurepip module.  A new
configure option, --with-ensurepip[=upgrade|install|no], is available to
override the default ensurepip "--upgrade" option.  The option can also be
set with "make [alt]install ENSUREPIP=[upgrade|install|no]".

..

.. bpo: 19551
.. date: 7924
.. nonce: Co7ZOp
.. section: Build

PEP 453 - the OS X installer now installs pip by default.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7923
.. nonce: kxcK-F
.. section: Build

Update third-party libraries for OS X installers: xz 5.0.3 -> 5.0.5, SQLite
3.7.13 -> 3.8.1

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 7922
.. nonce: f91_wP
.. section: Build

Revert OS X installer built-in Tcl/Tk support for 3.4.0b1. Some third-party
projects, such as Matplotlib and PIL/Pillow, depended on being able to build
with Tcl and Tk frameworks in /Library/Frameworks.

..

.. bpo: 19730
.. date: 7921
.. nonce: B7hBq7
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports all the existing PyArg "format units" as legacy
converters, as well as two new features: "self converters" and the "version"
directive.

..

.. bpo: 19552
.. date: 7920
.. nonce: zuitRR
.. section: Tools/Demos

pyvenv now bootstraps pip into virtual environments by default (pass
--without-pip to request the old behaviour)

..

.. bpo: 19390
.. date: 7919
.. nonce: CROPNO
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic no longer accepts malformed Python and C ids.
