.. bpo: 21418
.. date: 9446
.. nonce: z9jp1_
.. release date: 2014-05-18
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the builtin function super() when called without argument and
without current frame (ex: embedded Python).

..

.. bpo: 21425
.. date: 9445
.. nonce: i3Teb8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix flushing of standard streams in the interactive interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 21435
.. date: 9444
.. nonce: ZojVOT
.. section: Core and Builtins

In rare cases, when running finalizers on objects in cyclic trash a bad
pointer dereference could occur due to a subtle flaw in internal iteration
logic.

..

.. bpo: 10744
.. date: 9443
.. nonce: kfV0wm
.. section: Library

Fix PEP 3118 format strings on ctypes objects with a nontrivial shape.

..

.. bpo: 20998
.. date: 9442
.. nonce: fkxpXI
.. section: Library

Fixed re.fullmatch() of repeated single character pattern with ignore case.
Original patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 21075
.. date: 9441
.. nonce: f_hmEh
.. section: Library

fileinput.FileInput now reads bytes from standard stream if binary mode is
specified.  Patch by Sam Kimbrel.

..

.. bpo: 21396
.. date: 9440
.. nonce: cqO6DN
.. section: Library

Fix TextIOWrapper(..., write_through=True) to not force a flush() on the
underlying binary stream.  Patch by akira.

..

.. bpo: 21470
.. date: 9439
.. nonce: uH-yCD
.. section: Library

Do a better job seeding the random number generator by using enough bytes to
span the full state space of the Mersenne Twister.

..

.. bpo: 21398
.. date: 9438
.. nonce: nOXq5V
.. section: Library

Fix an unicode error in the pydoc pager when the documentation contains
characters not encodable to the stdout encoding.

..

.. bpo: 17756
.. date: 9437
.. nonce: LLfbfU
.. section: Tests

Fix test_code test when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 17752
.. date: 9436
.. nonce: P8iG44
.. section: Tests

Fix distutils tests when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 18104
.. date: 9435
.. nonce: 8Fj9Pf
.. section: IDLE

Add idlelib/idle_test/htest.py with a few sample tests to begin
consolidating and improving human-validated tests of Idle. Change other
files as needed to work with htest.  Running the module as __main__ runs all
tests.
