.. bpo: 21274
.. date: 9434
.. nonce: fVGfwq
.. release date: 2014-05-05
.. section: Core and Builtins

Define PATH_MAX for GNU/Hurd in Python/pythonrun.c.

..

.. bpo: 21209
.. date: 9433
.. nonce: nMljFr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix sending tuples to custom generator objects with the yield from syntax.

..

.. bpo: 21134
.. date: 9432
.. nonce: ZL4SKo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when str is called on an uninitialized UnicodeEncodeError,
UnicodeDecodeError, or UnicodeTranslateError object.

..

.. bpo: 19537
.. date: 9431
.. nonce: AkuC_J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix PyUnicode_DATA() alignment under m68k.  Patch by Andreas Schwab.

..

.. bpo: 20929
.. date: 9430
.. nonce: 9NlUR7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a type cast to avoid shifting a negative number.

..

.. bpo: 20731
.. date: 9429
.. nonce: _03SZg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly position in source code files even if they are opened in text mode.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 20637
.. date: 9428
.. nonce: ppYU0o
.. section: Core and Builtins

Key-sharing now also works for instance dictionaries of subclasses.  Patch
by Peter Ingebretson.

..

.. bpo: 12546
.. date: 9427
.. nonce: 09naZ9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow ``\x00`` to be used as a fill character when using str, int, float,
and complex __format__ methods.

..

.. bpo: 13598
.. date: 9426
.. nonce: GJelrw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify string.Formatter to support auto-numbering of replacement fields. It
now matches the behavior of str.format() in this regard. Patches by Phil
Elson and Ramchandra Apte.

..

.. bpo: 21088
.. date: 9425
.. nonce: WOg7Xy
.. section: Library

Bugfix for curses.window.addch() regression in 3.4.0. In porting to Argument
Clinic, the first two arguments were reversed.

..

.. bpo: 21469
.. date: 9424
.. nonce: _fFGuq
.. section: Library

Reduced the risk of false positives in robotparser by checking to make sure
that robots.txt has been read or does not exist prior to returning True in
can_fetch().

..

.. bpo: 21321
.. date: 9423
.. nonce: wUkTON
.. section: Library

itertools.islice() now releases the reference to the source iterator when
the slice is exhausted.  Patch by Anton Afanasyev.

..

.. bpo: 9815
.. date: 9422
.. nonce: 52FPlI
.. section: Library

assertRaises now tries to clear references to local variables in the
exception's traceback.

..

.. bpo: 13204
.. date: 9421
.. nonce: ZPKA5g
.. section: Library

Calling sys.flags.__new__ would crash the interpreter, now it raises a
TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 19385
.. date: 9420
.. nonce: PexO_g
.. section: Library

Make operations on a closed dbm.dumb database always raise the same
exception.

..

.. bpo: 21207
.. date: 9419
.. nonce: Hr72AB
.. section: Library

Detect when the os.urandom cached fd has been closed or replaced, and open
it anew.

..

.. bpo: 21291
.. date: 9418
.. nonce: 5sSLWN
.. section: Library

subprocess's Popen.wait() is now thread safe so that multiple threads may be
calling wait() or poll() on a Popen instance at the same time without losing
the Popen.returncode value.

..

.. bpo: 21127
.. date: 9417
.. nonce: A1aBjG
.. section: Library

Path objects can now be instantiated from str subclass instances (such as
``numpy.str_``).

..

.. bpo: 15002
.. date: 9416
.. nonce: qorYDe
.. section: Library

urllib.response object to use _TemporaryFileWrapper (and
_TemporaryFileCloser) facility. Provides a better way to handle file
descriptor close. Patch contributed by Christian Theune.

..

.. bpo: 12220
.. date: 9415
.. nonce: U25uE9
.. section: Library

mindom now raises a custom ValueError indicating it doesn't support spaces
in URIs instead of letting a 'split' ValueError bubble up.

..

.. bpo: 21239
.. date: 9414
.. nonce: EalCNt
.. section: Library

patch.stopall() didn't work deterministically when the same name was patched
more than once.

..

.. bpo: 21222
.. date: 9413
.. nonce: G6MQBP
.. section: Library

Passing name keyword argument to mock.create_autospec now works.

..

.. bpo: 21197
.. date: 9412
.. nonce: Gzfqdl
.. section: Library

Add lib64 -> lib symlink in venvs on 64-bit non-OS X POSIX.

..

.. bpo: 17498
.. date: 9411
.. nonce: LR9xyb
.. section: Library

Some SMTP servers disconnect after certain errors, violating strict RFC
conformance.  Instead of losing the error code when we issue the subsequent
RSET, smtplib now returns the error code and defers raising the
SMTPServerDisconnected error until the next command is issued.

..

.. bpo: 17826
.. date: 9410
.. nonce: z0zMRV
.. section: Library

setting an iterable side_effect on a mock function created by
create_autospec now works. Patch by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 7776
.. date: 9409
.. nonce: K5S2Pe
.. section: Library

Fix ``Host:`` header and reconnection when using
http.client.HTTPConnection.set_tunnel(). Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20968
.. date: 9408
.. nonce: 53Aagz
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.MagicMock now supports division. Patch by Johannes Baiter.

..

.. bpo: 21529
.. date: 9407
.. nonce: 57R_Fc
.. section: Library

Fix arbitrary memory access in JSONDecoder.raw_decode with a negative second
parameter. Bug reported by Guido Vranken. (See also: CVE-2014-4616)

..

.. bpo: 21169
.. date: 9406
.. nonce: KE7B0M
.. section: Library

getpass now handles non-ascii characters that the input stream encoding
cannot encode by re-encoding using the replace error handler.

..

.. bpo: 21171
.. date: 9405
.. nonce: iUbV9S
.. section: Library

Fixed undocumented filter API of the rot13 codec. Patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 21172
.. date: 9404
.. nonce: dQ7yY7
.. section: Library

isinstance check relaxed from dict to collections.Mapping.

..

.. bpo: 21155
.. date: 9403
.. nonce: JSKEE7
.. section: Library

asyncio.EventLoop.create_unix_server() now raises a ValueError if path and
sock are specified at the same time.

..

.. bpo: 21149
.. date: 9402
.. nonce: cnjwMR
.. section: Library

Improved thread-safety in logging cleanup during interpreter shutdown.
Thanks to Devin Jeanpierre for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 20145
.. date: 9401
.. nonce: FP5FY0
.. section: Library

`assertRaisesRegex` and `assertWarnsRegex` now raise a TypeError if the
second argument is not a string or compiled regex.

..

.. bpo: 21058
.. date: 9400
.. nonce: IhluPP
.. section: Library

Fix a leak of file descriptor in :func:`tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile`, close
the file descriptor if :func:`io.open` fails

..

.. bpo: 21200
.. date: 9399
.. nonce: Kht8yD
.. section: Library

Return None from pkgutil.get_loader() when __spec__ is missing.

..

.. bpo: 21013
.. date: 9398
.. nonce: 3s8Ic0
.. section: Library

Enhance ssl.create_default_context() when used for server side sockets to
provide better security by default.

..

.. bpo: 20633
.. date: 9397
.. nonce: 6kaPjT
.. section: Library

Replace relative import by absolute import.

..

.. bpo: 20980
.. date: 9396
.. nonce: cYszHY
.. section: Library

Stop wrapping exception when using ThreadPool.

..

.. bpo: 21082
.. date: 9395
.. nonce: GLzGlV
.. section: Library

In os.makedirs, do not set the process-wide umask. Note this changes
behavior of makedirs when exist_ok=True.

..

.. bpo: 20990
.. date: 9394
.. nonce: PBfjW3
.. section: Library

Fix issues found by pyflakes for multiprocessing.

..

.. bpo: 21015
.. date: 9393
.. nonce: xnwWAH
.. section: Library

SSL contexts will now automatically select an elliptic curve for ECDH key
exchange on OpenSSL 1.0.2 and later, and otherwise default to "prime256v1".

..

.. bpo: 20995
.. date: 9392
.. nonce: YfhicZ
.. section: Library

Enhance default ciphers used by the ssl module to enable better security an
prioritize perfect forward secrecy.

..

.. bpo: 20884
.. date: 9391
.. nonce: qNmub_
.. section: Library

Don't assume that __file__ is defined on importlib.__init__.

..

.. bpo: 21499
.. date: 9390
.. nonce: wU4OBi
.. section: Library

Ignore __builtins__ in several test_importlib.test_api tests.

..

.. bpo: 20879
.. date: 9389
.. nonce: myeYdq
.. section: Library

Delay the initialization of encoding and decoding tables for base32, ascii85
and base85 codecs in the base64 module, and delay the initialization of the
unquote_to_bytes() table of the urllib.parse module, to not waste memory if
these modules are not used.

..

.. bpo: 19157
.. date: 9388
.. nonce: V1-XhC
.. section: Library

Include the broadcast address in the usuable hosts for IPv6 in ipaddress.

..

.. bpo: 11599
.. date: 9387
.. nonce: 9QOXf4
.. section: Library

When an external command (e.g. compiler) fails, distutils now prints out the
whole command line (instead of just the command name) if the environment
variable DISTUTILS_DEBUG is set.

..

.. bpo: 4931
.. date: 9386
.. nonce: uF10hr
.. section: Library

distutils should not produce unhelpful "error: None" messages anymore.
distutils.util.grok_environment_error is kept but doc-deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 20875
.. date: 9385
.. nonce: IjfI5V
.. section: Library

Prevent possible gzip "'read' is not defined" NameError. Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 11558
.. date: 9384
.. nonce: pxrsmq
.. section: Library

``email.message.Message.attach`` now returns a more useful error message if
``attach`` is called on a message for which ``is_multipart`` is False.

..

.. bpo: 20283
.. date: 9383
.. nonce: v0Vs9V
.. section: Library

RE pattern methods now accept the string keyword parameters as documented.
The pattern and source keyword parameters are left as deprecated aliases.

..

.. bpo: 20778
.. date: 9382
.. nonce: g_fAGI
.. section: Library

Fix modulefinder to work with bytecode-only modules.

..

.. bpo: 20791
.. date: 9381
.. nonce: n_zrkc
.. section: Library

copy.copy() now doesn't make a copy when the input is a bytes object.
Initial patch by Peter Otten.

..

.. bpo: 19748
.. date: 9380
.. nonce: kiA171
.. section: Library

On AIX, time.mktime() now raises an OverflowError for year outsize range
[1902; 2037].

..

.. bpo: 20816
.. date: 9379
.. nonce: DFMEgN
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs() to raise correct TypeError for missing keyword-
only arguments. Patch by Jeremiah Lowin.

..

.. bpo: 20817
.. date: 9378
.. nonce: O5XyZB
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs() to fail correctly if more than 3 arguments are
missing. Patch by Jeremiah Lowin.

..

.. bpo: 6676
.. date: 9377
.. nonce: CJu5On
.. section: Library

Ensure a meaningful exception is raised when attempting to parse more than
one XML document per pyexpat xmlparser instance. (Original patches by
Hirokazu Yamamoto and Amaury Forgeot d'Arc, with suggested wording by David
Gutteridge)

..

.. bpo: 21117
.. date: 9376
.. nonce: hyH7EK
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.signature to better support functools.partial. Due to the
specifics of functools.partial implementation, positional-or-keyword
arguments passed as keyword arguments become keyword-only.

..

.. bpo: 21209
.. date: 9375
.. nonce: wRE7Dn
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio.tasks.CoroWrapper to workaround a bug in yield-from
implementation in CPythons prior to 3.4.1.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9374
.. nonce: Q1I78Z
.. section: Library

asyncio: Add gi_{frame,running,code} properties to CoroWrapper (upstream
issue #163).

..

.. bpo: 21311
.. date: 9373
.. nonce: JsDF8H
.. section: Library

Avoid exception in _osx_support with non-standard compiler configurations.
Patch by John Szakmeister.

..

.. bpo: 11571
.. date: 9372
.. nonce: RPeGNo
.. section: Library

Ensure that the turtle window becomes the topmost window when launched on OS
X.

..

.. bpo: 21276
.. date: 9371
.. nonce: JkfhvQ
.. section: Library

posixmodule: Don't define USE_XATTRS on KFreeBSD and the Hurd.

..

.. bpo: 21226
.. date: 9370
.. nonce: pzGmG1
.. section: Library

Set up modules properly in PyImport_ExecCodeModuleObject (and friends).

..

.. bpo: 21139
.. date: 9369
.. nonce: kqetng
.. section: IDLE

Change default paragraph width to 72, the PEP 8 recommendation.

..

.. bpo: 21284
.. date: 9368
.. nonce: KKJfmv
.. section: IDLE

Paragraph reformat test passes after user changes reformat width.

..

.. bpo: 17654
.. date: 9367
.. nonce: NbzhNS
.. section: IDLE

Ensure IDLE menus are customized properly on OS X for non-framework builds
and for all variants of Tk.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9366
.. nonce: QfpS73
.. section: Build

The Windows build now includes OpenSSL 1.0.1g

..

.. bpo: 21285
.. date: 9365
.. nonce: cU9p2E
.. section: Build

Refactor and fix curses configure check to always search in a ncursesw
directory.

..

.. bpo: 15234
.. date: 9364
.. nonce: vlM720
.. section: Build

For BerkelyDB and Sqlite, only add the found library and include directories
if they aren't already being searched. This avoids an explicit runtime
library dependency.

..

.. bpo: 20644
.. date: 9363
.. nonce: aV0zq7
.. section: Build

OS X installer build support for documentation build changes in 3.4.1:
assume externally supplied sphinx-build is available in /usr/bin.

..

.. bpo: 20942
.. date: 9362
.. nonce: qHLJ5-
.. section: C API

PyImport_ImportFrozenModuleObject() no longer sets __file__ to match what
importlib does; this affects _frozen_importlib as well as any module loaded
using imp.init_frozen().

..

.. bpo: 17386
.. date: 9361
.. nonce: ivaGLb
.. section: Documentation

Expanded functionality of the ``Doc/make.bat`` script to make it much more
comparable to ``Doc/Makefile``.

..

.. bpo: 21043
.. date: 9360
.. nonce: oEOC8O
.. section: Documentation

Remove the recommendation for specific CA organizations and to mention the
ability to load the OS certificates.

..

.. bpo: 20765
.. date: 9359
.. nonce: Rv3GgV
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for PurePath.with_name() and
PurePath.with_suffix().

..

.. bpo: 19407
.. date: 9358
.. nonce: mRyNnG
.. section: Documentation

New package installation and distribution guides based on the Python
Packaging Authority tools. Existing guides have been retained as legacy
links from the distutils docs, as they still contain some required reference
material for tool developers that isn't recorded anywhere else.

..

.. bpo: 19697
.. date: 9357
.. nonce: 2jMQBP
.. section: Documentation

Document cases where __main__.__spec__ is None.

..

.. bpo: 18604
.. date: 9356
.. nonce: Q00Xrj
.. section: Tests

Consolidated checks for GUI availability.  All platforms now at least check
whether Tk can be instantiated when the GUI resource is requested.

..

.. bpo: 21275
.. date: 9355
.. nonce: lI5FkX
.. section: Tests

Fix a socket test on KFreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 21223
.. date: 9354
.. nonce: lMY6ka
.. section: Tests

Pass test_site/test_startup_imports when some of the extensions are built as
builtins.

..

.. bpo: 20635
.. date: 9353
.. nonce: mzWmoS
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tk geometry managers.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9352
.. nonce: E5XNqr
.. section: Tests

Add test case for freeze.

..

.. bpo: 20743
.. date: 9351
.. nonce: hxZQUf
.. section: Tests

Fix a reference leak in test_tcl.

..

.. bpo: 21097
.. date: 9350
.. nonce: gsUesm
.. section: Tests

Move test_namespace_pkgs into test_importlib.

..

.. bpo: 20939
.. date: 9349
.. nonce: x3KQ35
.. section: Tests

Avoid various network test failures due to new redirect of
http://www.python.org/ to https://www.python.org: use http://www.example.com
instead.

..

.. bpo: 20668
.. date: 9348
.. nonce: IWjOSC
.. section: Tests

asyncio tests no longer rely on tests.txt file. (Patch by Vajrasky Kok)

..

.. bpo: 21093
.. date: 9347
.. nonce: CcpRim
.. section: Tests

Prevent failures of ctypes test_macholib on OS X if a copy of libz exists in
$HOME/lib or /usr/local/lib.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9346
.. nonce: _-ge-g
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for ``yield from`` to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9345
.. nonce: dpFbyZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for the PEP 465 matrix multiplication operator to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 16047
.. date: 9344
.. nonce: IsgTzm
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix module exception list and __file__ handling in freeze. Patch by Meador
Inge.

..

.. bpo: 11824
.. date: 9343
.. nonce: OBWc3T
.. section: Tools/Demos

Consider ABI tags in freeze. Patch by Meador Inge.

..

.. bpo: 20535
.. date: 9342
.. nonce: 0qkvZZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

PYTHONWARNING no longer affects the run_tests.py script. Patch by Arfrever
Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.
