.. bpo: 17432
.. date: 8188
.. nonce: mmNI4f
.. release date: 2014-01-05
.. section: Core and Builtins

Drop UCS2 from names of Unicode functions in python3.def.

..

.. bpo: 19526
.. date: 8187
.. nonce: 9WWttQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Exclude all new API from the stable ABI. Exceptions can be made if a need is
demonstrated.

..

.. bpo: 19969
.. date: 8186
.. nonce: mmRsrB
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyBytes_FromFormatV() now raises an OverflowError if "%c" argument is not in
range [0; 255].

..

.. bpo: 19995
.. date: 8185
.. nonce: gQHtAc
.. section: Core and Builtins

%c, %o, %x, and %X now issue a DeprecationWarning on non-integer input;
reworded docs to clarify that an integer type should define both __int__ and
__index__.

..

.. bpo: 19787
.. date: 8184
.. nonce: tAMy-H
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyThread_set_key_value() now always set the value. In Python 3.3, the
function did nothing if the key already exists (if the current value is a
non-NULL pointer).

..

.. bpo: 14432
.. date: 8183
.. nonce: yov4oy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove the thread state field from the frame structure. Fix a crash when a
generator is created in a C thread that is destroyed while the generator is
still used. The issue was that a generator contains a frame, and the frame
kept a reference to the Python state of the destroyed C thread. The crash
occurs when a trace function is setup.

..

.. bpo: 19576
.. date: 8182
.. nonce: b_UtIp
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyGILState_Ensure() now initializes threads. At startup, Python has no
concrete GIL. If PyGILState_Ensure() is called from a new thread for the
first time and PyEval_InitThreads() was not called yet, a GIL needs to be
created.

..

.. bpo: 17576
.. date: 8181
.. nonce: ukzqsg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Deprecation warning emitted now when __int__() or __index__() return not int
instance.

..

.. bpo: 19932
.. date: 8180
.. nonce: ZU_tXW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix typo in import.h, missing whitespaces in function prototypes.

..

.. bpo: 19736
.. date: 8179
.. nonce: j35rNX
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add module-level statvfs constants defined for GNU/glibc based systems.

..

.. bpo: 20097
.. date: 8178
.. nonce: _L-Wql
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix bad use of "self" in importlib's WindowsRegistryFinder.

..

.. bpo: 19729
.. date: 8177
.. nonce: HmZThe
.. section: Core and Builtins

In str.format(), fix recursive expansion in format spec.

..

.. bpo: 19638
.. date: 8176
.. nonce: lh5Awt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crash / undefined behaviour from huge (more than 2 billion
characters) input strings in _Py_dg_strtod.

..

.. bpo: 20154
.. date: 8175
.. nonce: 5JyK0Q
.. section: Library

Deadlock in asyncio.StreamReader.readexactly().

..

.. bpo: 16113
.. date: 8174
.. nonce: 2gaEPO
.. section: Library

Remove sha3 module again.

..

.. bpo: 20111
.. date: 8173
.. nonce: NsoIDi
.. section: Library

pathlib.Path.with_suffix() now sanity checks the given suffix.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8172
.. nonce: 6LOl16
.. section: Library

Fix breakage in TestSuite.countTestCases() introduced by issue #11798.

..

.. bpo: 20108
.. date: 8171
.. nonce: HxuC0s
.. section: Library

Avoid parameter name clash in inspect.getcallargs().

..

.. bpo: 19918
.. date: 8170
.. nonce: SciMAd
.. section: Library

Fix PurePath.relative_to() under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 19422
.. date: 8169
.. nonce: 1dRaPS
.. section: Library

Explicitly disallow non-SOCK_STREAM sockets in the ssl module, rather than
silently let them emit clear text data.

..

.. bpo: 20046
.. date: 8168
.. nonce: NkWtze
.. section: Library

Locale alias table no longer contains entities which can be calculated.
Generalized support of the euro modifier.

..

.. bpo: 20027
.. date: 8167
.. nonce: dtB7OG
.. section: Library

Fixed locale aliases for devanagari locales.

..

.. bpo: 20067
.. date: 8166
.. nonce: MlnlYd
.. section: Library

Tkinter variables now work when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19020
.. date: 8165
.. nonce: _16K__
.. section: Library

Tkinter now uses splitlist() instead of split() in configure methods.

..

.. bpo: 19744
.. date: 8164
.. nonce: frub3A
.. section: Library

ensurepip now provides a better error message when Python is built without
SSL/TLS support (pip currently requires that support to run, even if only
operating with local wheel files)

..

.. bpo: 19734
.. date: 8163
.. nonce: jHpBF-
.. section: Library

ensurepip now ignores all pip environment variables to avoid odd behaviour
based on user configuration settings

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8162
.. nonce: d5LOJv
.. section: Library

Fix TypeError on "setup.py upload --show-response".

..

.. bpo: 20045
.. date: 8161
.. nonce: fdKDSA
.. section: Library

Fix "setup.py register --list-classifiers".

..

.. bpo: 18879
.. date: 8160
.. nonce: CEiozo
.. section: Library

When a method is looked up on a temporary file, avoid closing the file
before the method is possibly called.

..

.. bpo: 20037
.. date: 8159
.. nonce: Mnn2jV
.. section: Library

Avoid crashes when opening a text file late at interpreter shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 19967
.. date: 8158
.. nonce: 0zAW9L
.. section: Library

Thanks to the PEP 442, asyncio.Future now uses a destructor to log uncaught
exceptions, instead of the dedicated _TracebackLogger class.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8157
.. nonce: Gqaj5f
.. section: Library

Added a Task.current_task() class method to asyncio.

..

.. bpo: 19850
.. date: 8156
.. nonce: WPTJDe
.. section: Library

Set SA_RESTART in asyncio when registering a signal handler to limit EINTR
occurrences.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8155
.. nonce: JivAZe
.. section: Library

Implemented write flow control in asyncio for proactor event loop (Windows).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8154
.. nonce: WBY2wl
.. section: Library

Change write buffer in asyncio use to avoid O(N**2) behavior.  Make
write()/sendto() accept bytearray/memoryview.

..

.. bpo: 20034
.. date: 8153
.. nonce: GlYpNX
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping to most recent locale.alias file from X.org
distribution using makelocalealias.py.

..

.. bpo: 5815
.. date: 8152
.. nonce: FxSb0P
.. section: Library

Fixed support for locales with modifiers.  Fixed support for locale
encodings with hyphens.

..

.. bpo: 20026
.. date: 8151
.. nonce: KO1jB6
.. section: Library

Fix the sqlite module to handle correctly invalid isolation level (wrong
type).

..

.. bpo: 18829
.. date: 8150
.. nonce: QPwJFn
.. section: Library

csv.Dialect() now checks type for delimiter, escapechar and quotechar
fields.  Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19855
.. date: 8149
.. nonce: TtBUO6
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() on Unix now looks on the PATH for the executables used to
find the mac address, with /sbin and /usr/sbin as fallbacks.

..

.. bpo: 20007
.. date: 8148
.. nonce: IaSnPo
.. section: Library

HTTPResponse.read(0) no more prematurely closes connection. Original patch
by Simon Sapin.

..

.. bpo: 19946
.. date: 8147
.. nonce: hcbn92
.. section: Library

multiprocessing now uses runpy to initialize __main__ in child processes
when necessary, allowing it to correctly handle scripts without suffixes and
submodules that use explicit relative imports or otherwise rely on parent
modules being correctly imported prior to execution.

..

.. bpo: 19921
.. date: 8146
.. nonce: LGeNky
.. section: Library

When Path.mkdir() is called with parents=True, any missing parent is created
with the default permissions, ignoring the mode argument (mimicking the
POSIX "mkdir -p" command).

..

.. bpo: 19887
.. date: 8145
.. nonce: 2jM2qA
.. section: Library

Improve the Path.resolve() algorithm to support certain symlink chains.

..

.. bpo: 19912
.. date: 8144
.. nonce: TviIPi
.. section: Library

Fixed numerous bugs in ntpath.splitunc().

..

.. bpo: 19911
.. date: 8143
.. nonce: w1QmnT
.. section: Library

ntpath.splitdrive() now correctly processes the 'İ' character (U+0130, LATIN
CAPITAL LETTER I WITH DOT ABOVE).

..

.. bpo: 19532
.. date: 8142
.. nonce: vCt7bh
.. section: Library

python -m compileall with no filename/directory arguments now respects the
-f and -q flags instead of ignoring them.

..

.. bpo: 19623
.. date: 8141
.. nonce: zv4rIL
.. section: Library

Fixed writing to unseekable files in the aifc module.

..

.. bpo: 19946
.. date: 8140
.. nonce: b4Js6X
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.spawn now raises ImportError when the module to be used as
the main module cannot be imported.

..

.. bpo: 17919
.. date: 8139
.. nonce: H5iGXv
.. section: Library

select.poll.register() again works with poll.POLLNVAL on AIX. Fixed integer
overflow in the eventmask parameter.

..

.. bpo: 19063
.. date: 8138
.. nonce: pQzK1K
.. section: Library

if a Charset's body_encoding was set to None, the email package would
generate a message claiming the Content-Transfer-Encoding was 7bit, and
produce garbage output for the content.  This now works. A couple of other
set_payload mishandlings of non-ASCII are also fixed. In addition, calling
set_payload with a string argument without specifying a charset now raises
an error (this is a new error in 3.4).

..

.. bpo: 15475
.. date: 8137
.. nonce: -vqlm1
.. section: Library

Add __sizeof__ implementations for itertools objects.

..

.. bpo: 19944
.. date: 8136
.. nonce: XxQU2O
.. section: Library

Fix importlib.find_spec() so it imports parents as needed and move the
function to importlib.util.

..

.. bpo: 19880
.. date: 8135
.. nonce: wJls1u
.. section: Library

Fix a reference leak in unittest.TestCase. Explicitly break reference cycles
between frames and the _Outcome instance.

..

.. bpo: 17429
.. date: 8134
.. nonce: dlZP0_
.. section: Library

platform.linux_distribution() now decodes files from the UTF-8 encoding with
the surrogateescape error handler, instead of decoding from the locale
encoding in strict mode. It fixes the function on Fedora 19 which is
probably the first major distribution release with a non-ASCII name. Patch
written by Toshio Kuratomi.

..

.. bpo: 19343
.. date: 8133
.. nonce: La15PA
.. section: Library

Expose FreeBSD-specific APIs in resource module.  Original patch by Koobs.

..

.. bpo: 19929
.. date: 8132
.. nonce: BZDeEj
.. section: Library

Call os.read with 32768 within subprocess.Popen.communicate rather than 4096
for efficiency.  A microbenchmark shows Linux and OS X both using ~50% less
cpu time this way.

..

.. bpo: 19506
.. date: 8131
.. nonce: GteUMC
.. section: Library

Use a memoryview to avoid a data copy when piping data to stdin within
subprocess.Popen.communicate.  5-10% less cpu usage.

..

.. bpo: 19876
.. date: 8130
.. nonce: 2YXHY-
.. section: Library

selectors unregister() no longer raises ValueError or OSError if the FD is
closed (as long as it was registered).

..

.. bpo: 19908
.. date: 8129
.. nonce: rOsMVQ
.. section: Library

pathlib now joins relative Windows paths correctly when a drive is present.
Original patch by Antoine Pitrou.

..

.. bpo: 19296
.. date: 8128
.. nonce: WVPZAK
.. section: Library

Silence compiler warning in dbm_open

..

.. bpo: 6784
.. date: 8127
.. nonce: uxEt6F
.. section: Library

Strings from Python 2 can now be unpickled as bytes objects by setting the
encoding argument of Unpickler to be 'bytes'. Initial patch by Merlijn van
Deen.

..

.. bpo: 19839
.. date: 8126
.. nonce: qfP0k5
.. section: Library

Fix regression in bz2 module's handling of non-bzip2 data at EOF, and
analogous bug in lzma module.

..

.. bpo: 19881
.. date: 8125
.. nonce: NKrKAh
.. section: Library

Fix pickling bug where cpickle would emit bad pickle data for large bytes
string (i.e., with size greater than 2**32-1).

..

.. bpo: 19138
.. date: 8124
.. nonce: xwKrX_
.. section: Library

doctest's IGNORE_EXCEPTION_DETAIL now allows a match when no exception
detail exists (no colon following the exception's name, or a colon does
follow but no text follows the colon).

..

.. bpo: 19927
.. date: 8123
.. nonce: ZijD-E
.. section: Library

Add __eq__ to path-based loaders in importlib.

..

.. bpo: 19827
.. date: 8122
.. nonce: KBYfyd
.. section: Library

On UNIX, setblocking() and settimeout() methods of socket.socket can now
avoid a second syscall if the ioctl() function can be used, or if the non-
blocking flag of the socket is unchanged.

..

.. bpo: 19785
.. date: 8121
.. nonce: dTWAof
.. section: Library

smtplib now supports SSLContext.check_hostname and server name indication
for TLS/SSL connections.

..

.. bpo: 19784
.. date: 8120
.. nonce: t85DbS
.. section: Library

poplib now supports SSLContext.check_hostname and server name indication for
TLS/SSL connections.

..

.. bpo: 19783
.. date: 8119
.. nonce: VRsf8d
.. section: Library

nntplib now supports SSLContext.check_hostname and server name indication
for TLS/SSL connections.

..

.. bpo: 19782
.. date: 8118
.. nonce: 7jF-re
.. section: Library

imaplib now supports SSLContext.check_hostname and server name indication
for TLS/SSL connections.

..

.. bpo: 20123
.. date: 8117
.. nonce: o-MHVk
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() for "binary" modules.

..

.. bpo: 19834
.. date: 8116
.. nonce: rlFmTq
.. section: Library

Support unpickling of exceptions pickled by Python 2.

..

.. bpo: 19781
.. date: 8115
.. nonce: 4ZiyRb
.. section: Library

ftplib now supports SSLContext.check_hostname and server name indication for
TLS/SSL connections.

..

.. bpo: 19509
.. date: 8114
.. nonce: I2qj0u
.. section: Library

Add SSLContext.check_hostname to match the peer's certificate with
server_hostname on handshake.

..

.. bpo: 15798
.. date: 8113
.. nonce: 1bxNCP
.. section: Library

Fixed subprocess.Popen() to no longer fail if file descriptor 0, 1 or 2 is
closed.

..

.. bpo: 17897
.. date: 8112
.. nonce: 0iKzvE
.. section: Library

Optimized unpickle prefetching.

..

.. bpo: 3693
.. date: 8111
.. nonce: _c0s5z
.. section: Library

Make the error message more helpful when the array.array() constructor is
given a str. Move the array module typecode documentation to the docstring
of the constructor.

..

.. bpo: 19088
.. date: 8110
.. nonce: JBKVzp
.. section: Library

Fixed incorrect caching of the copyreg module in object.__reduce__() and
object.__reduce_ex__().

..

.. bpo: 19698
.. date: 8109
.. nonce: Xcq8uC
.. section: Library

Removed exec_module() methods from importlib.machinery.BuiltinImporter and
ExtensionFileLoader.

..

.. bpo: 18864
.. date: 8108
.. nonce: 2CR2Xi
.. section: Library

Added a setter for ModuleSpec.has_location.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8107
.. nonce: UKWITk
.. section: Library

Fixed _pickle.Unpickler to not fail when loading empty strings as persistent
IDs.

..

.. bpo: 11480
.. date: 8106
.. nonce: qkIZLG
.. section: Library

Fixed copy.copy to work with classes with custom metaclasses. Patch by
Daniel Urban.

..

.. bpo: 6477
.. date: 8105
.. nonce: nK1lHr
.. section: Library

Added support for pickling the types of built-in singletons (i.e., Ellipsis,
NotImplemented, None).

..

.. bpo: 19713
.. date: 8104
.. nonce: UhiUKc
.. section: Library

Add remaining PEP 451-related deprecations and move away from using
find_module/find_loaer/load_module.

..

.. bpo: 19708
.. date: 8103
.. nonce: HJuToY
.. section: Library

Update pkgutil to use the new importer APIs.

..

.. bpo: 19703
.. date: 8102
.. nonce: pLtVYQ
.. section: Library

Update pydoc to use the new importer APIs.

..

.. bpo: 19851
.. date: 8101
.. nonce: 4HQZWz
.. section: Library

Fixed a regression in reloading sub-modules.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8100
.. nonce: 3H16yn
.. section: Library

ssl.create_default_context() sets OP_NO_COMPRESSION to prevent CRIME.

..

.. bpo: 19802
.. date: 8099
.. nonce: PswaEk
.. section: Library

Add socket.SO_PRIORITY.

..

.. bpo: 11508
.. date: 8098
.. nonce: fx7Abs
.. section: Library

Fixed uuid.getnode() and uuid.uuid1() on environment with virtual interface.
Original patch by Kent Frazier.

..

.. bpo: 11489
.. date: 8097
.. nonce: 3ZQHi8
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now accepts lone surrogates.

..

.. bpo: 19545
.. date: 8096
.. nonce: 1FBY5Z
.. section: Library

Avoid chained exceptions while passing stray % to time.strptime().  Initial
patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 20058
.. date: 8095
.. nonce: KnDlhH
.. section: IDLE

sys.stdin.readline() in IDLE now always returns only one line.

..

.. bpo: 19481
.. date: 8094
.. nonce: BNkHOm
.. section: IDLE

print() of string subclass instance in IDLE no longer hangs.

..

.. bpo: 18270
.. date: 8093
.. nonce: lu6dRW
.. section: IDLE

Prevent possible IDLE AttributeError on OS X when no initial shell window is
present.

..

.. bpo: 20055
.. date: 8092
.. nonce: iE7yU6
.. section: Tests

Fix test_shutil under Windows with symlink privileges held. Patch by
Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 20070
.. date: 8091
.. nonce: HpyZrQ
.. section: Tests

Don't run test_urllib2net when network resources are not enabled.

..

.. bpo: 19938
.. date: 8090
.. nonce: 2iLiKJ
.. section: Tests

Re-enabled test_bug_1333982 in test_dis, which had been disabled since 3.0
due to the changes in listcomp handling.

..

.. bpo: 19320
.. date: 8089
.. nonce: 9x_cw5
.. section: Tests

test_tcl no longer fails when wantobjects is false.

..

.. bpo: 19919
.. date: 8088
.. nonce: N9bnWv
.. section: Tests

Fix flaky SSL test. connect_ex() sometimes returns EWOULDBLOCK on Windows or
VMs hosted on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 19912
.. date: 8087
.. nonce: NmE9ZX
.. section: Tests

Added tests for ntpath.splitunc().

..

.. bpo: 19828
.. date: 8086
.. nonce: f5HrFG
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_site when the whole suite is run with -S.

..

.. bpo: 19928
.. date: 8085
.. nonce: dwOQ95
.. section: Tests

Implemented a test for repr() of cell objects.

..

.. bpo: 19535
.. date: 8084
.. nonce: 9ZtpA7
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_docxmlrpc, test_functools, test_inspect, and test_statistics when
python is run with -OO.

..

.. bpo: 19926
.. date: 8083
.. nonce: fkWjtw
.. section: Tests

Removed unneeded test_main from test_abstract_numbers. Patch by Vajrasky
Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19572
.. date: 8082
.. nonce: _65KAy
.. section: Tests

More skipped tests explicitly marked as skipped.

..

.. bpo: 19595
.. date: 8081
.. nonce: q5oNE_
.. section: Tests

Re-enabled a long-disabled test in test_winsound. (See also: bpo-19987)

..

.. bpo: 19588
.. date: 8080
.. nonce: EXKxpC
.. section: Tests

Fixed tests in test_random that were silently skipped most of the time.
Patch by Julian Gindi.

..

.. bpo: 19728
.. date: 8079
.. nonce: q1zXeT
.. section: Build

Enable pip installation by default on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 16136
.. date: 8078
.. nonce: FQGvGl
.. section: Build

Remove VMS support

..

.. bpo: 18215
.. date: 8077
.. nonce: yw2j0l
.. section: Build

Add script Tools/ssl/test_multiple_versions.py to compile and run Python's
unit tests with multiple versions of OpenSSL.

..

.. bpo: 19922
.. date: 8076
.. nonce: cG30aH
.. section: Build

define _INCLUDE__STDC_A1_SOURCE in HP-UX to include mbstate_t for mbrtowc().

..

.. bpo: 19788
.. date: 8075
.. nonce: P7qrFB
.. section: Build

kill_python(_d).exe is now run as a PreBuildEvent on the pythoncore sub-
project.  This should prevent build errors due a previous build's
python(_d).exe still running.

..

.. bpo: 20265
.. date: 8074
.. nonce: J7Xxm7
.. section: Documentation

Updated some parts of the Using Windows document.

..

.. bpo: 20266
.. date: 8073
.. nonce: CieiXa
.. section: Documentation

Updated some parts of the Windows FAQ.

..

.. bpo: 20255
.. date: 8072
.. nonce: SnYjEP
.. section: Documentation

Updated the about and bugs pages.

..

.. bpo: 20253
.. date: 8071
.. nonce: nbp6uJ
.. section: Documentation

Fixed a typo in the ipaddress docs that advertised an illegal attribute
name.  Found by INADA Naoki.

..

.. bpo: 18840
.. date: 8070
.. nonce: _2UItV
.. section: Documentation

Introduce the json module in the tutorial, and de-emphasize the pickle
module.

..

.. bpo: 19845
.. date: 8069
.. nonce: luj-oI
.. section: Documentation

Updated the Compiling Python on Windows section.

..

.. bpo: 19795
.. date: 8068
.. nonce: z5sbe1
.. section: Documentation

Improved markup of True/False constants.

..

.. bpo: 19659
.. date: 8067
.. nonce: kghZl0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Added documentation for Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 19976
.. date: 8066
.. nonce: My60GG
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic METH_NOARGS functions now always take two parameters.
