.. bpo: 20189
.. date: 8254
.. nonce: OIbmmo
.. release date: 2014-01-26
.. section: Core and Builtins

Four additional builtin types (PyTypeObject, PyMethodDescr_Type,
_PyMethodWrapper_Type, and PyWrapperDescr_Type) have been modified to
provide introspection information for builtins.

..

.. bpo: 17825
.. date: 8253
.. nonce: toRoZf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Cursor "^" is correctly positioned for SyntaxError and IndentationError.

..

.. bpo: 2382
.. date: 8252
.. nonce: kL_Sgg
.. section: Core and Builtins

SyntaxError cursor "^" is now written at correct position in most cases when
multibyte characters are in line (before "^").  This still not works
correctly with wide East Asian characters.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 8251
.. nonce: lhfZNw
.. section: Core and Builtins

The first line of Python script could be executed twice when the source
encoding was specified on the second line.  Now the source encoding
declaration on the second line isn't effective if the first line contains
anything except a comment.  'python -x' works now again with files with the
source encoding declarations, and can be used to make Python batch files on
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8250
.. nonce: GB7eBz
.. section: Library

asyncio: Various improvements and small changes not all covered by issues
listed below.  E.g. wait_for() now cancels the inner task if the timeout
occcurs; tweaked the set of exported symbols; renamed Empty/Full to
QueueEmpty/QueueFull; "with (yield from lock)" now uses a separate context
manager; readexactly() raises if not enough data was read; PTY support
tweaks.

..

.. bpo: 20311
.. date: 8249
.. nonce: -6LF_t
.. section: Library

asyncio: Add a granularity attribute to BaseEventLoop: maximum between the
resolution of the BaseEventLoop.time() method and the resolution of the
selector. The granuarility is used in the scheduler to round time and
deadline.

..

.. bpo: 20311
.. date: 8248
.. nonce: JgE5j7
.. section: Library

selectors: Add a resolution attribute to BaseSelector.

..

.. bpo: 20189
.. date: 8247
.. nonce: L9IuSm
.. section: Library

unittest.mock now no longer assumes that any object for which it could get
an inspect.Signature is a callable written in Python. Fix courtesy of
Michael Foord.

..

.. bpo: 20317
.. date: 8246
.. nonce: 9JI93M
.. section: Library

ExitStack.__exit__ could create a self-referential loop if an exception
raised by a cleanup operation already had its context set correctly (for
example, by the @contextmanager decorator). The infinite loop this caused is
now avoided by checking if the expected context is already set before trying
to fix it.

..

.. bpo: 20374
.. date: 8245
.. nonce: EWofHb
.. section: Library

Fix build with GNU readline >= 6.3.

..

.. bpo: 20262
.. date: 8244
.. nonce: co0t1R
.. section: Library

Warnings are raised now when duplicate names are added in the ZIP file or
too long ZIP file comment is truncated.

..

.. bpo: 20165
.. date: 8243
.. nonce: PyLZUR
.. section: Library

The unittest module no longer considers tests marked with @expectedFailure
successful if they pass.

..

.. bpo: 18574
.. date: 8242
.. nonce: 28Z8aX
.. section: Library

Added missing newline in 100-Continue reply from
http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler. Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20270
.. date: 8241
.. nonce: Z2Cks9
.. section: Library

urllib.urlparse now supports empty ports.

..

.. bpo: 20243
.. date: 8240
.. nonce: nApKCK
.. section: Library

TarFile no longer raise ReadError when opened in write mode.

..

.. bpo: 20238
.. date: 8239
.. nonce: qojq-l
.. section: Library

TarFile opened with external fileobj and "w:gz" mode didn't write complete
output on close.

..

.. bpo: 20245
.. date: 8238
.. nonce: 93kf_h
.. section: Library

The open functions in the tarfile module now correctly handle empty mode.

..

.. bpo: 20242
.. date: 8237
.. nonce: yvmL9l
.. section: Library

Fixed basicConfig() format strings for the alternative formatting styles.
Thanks to kespindler for the bug report and patch.

..

.. bpo: 20246
.. date: 8236
.. nonce: CC8uTq
.. section: Library

Fix buffer overflow in socket.recvfrom_into.

..

.. bpo: 20206
.. date: 8235
.. nonce: CtFEMz
.. section: Library

Fix edge case in email.quoprimime.encode where it truncated lines ending in
a character needing encoding but no newline by using a more efficient
algorithm that doesn't have the bug. (See also: bpo-5803)

..

.. bpo: 19082
.. date: 8234
.. nonce: idZnK7
.. section: Library

Working xmlrpc.server and xmlrpc.client examples. Both in modules and in
documentation. Initial patch contributed by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 20138
.. date: 8233
.. nonce: A4c9qc
.. section: Library

The wsgiref.application_uri() and wsgiref.request_uri() functions now
conform to PEP 3333 when handle non-ASCII URLs.

..

.. bpo: 19097
.. date: 8232
.. nonce: 5aGg0o
.. section: Library

Raise the correct Exception when cgi.FieldStorage is given an invalid
fileobj.

..

.. bpo: 20152
.. date: 8231
.. nonce: eqfltY
.. section: Library

Ported Python/import.c over to Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 13107
.. date: 8230
.. nonce: YgEEME
.. section: Library

argparse and optparse no longer raises an exception when output a help on
environment with too small COLUMNS.  Based on patch by Elazar Gershuni.

..

.. bpo: 20207
.. date: 8229
.. nonce: ziIyF1
.. section: Library

Always disable SSLv2 except when PROTOCOL_SSLv2 is explicitly asked for.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 8228
.. nonce: _8qsXn
.. section: Library

The tokenize module now ignore the source encoding declaration on the second
line if the first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 20078
.. date: 8227
.. nonce: 4FYvd_
.. section: Library

Reading malformed zipfiles no longer hangs with 100% CPU consumption.

..

.. bpo: 20113
.. date: 8226
.. nonce: T6DWMh
.. section: Library

os.readv() and os.writev() now raise an OSError exception on error instead
of returning -1.

..

.. bpo: 19719
.. date: 8225
.. nonce: 1yF3Hm
.. section: Library

Make importlib.abc.MetaPathFinder.find_module(),
PathEntryFinder.find_loader(), and Loader.load_module() use PEP 451 APIs to
help with backwards-compatibility.

..

.. bpo: 20144
.. date: 8224
.. nonce: UDSyaK
.. section: Library

inspect.Signature now supports parsing simple symbolic constants as
parameter default values in __text_signature__.

..

.. bpo: 20072
.. date: 8223
.. nonce: FzVG15
.. section: Library

Fixed multiple errors in tkinter with wantobjects is False.

..

.. bpo: 20229
.. date: 8222
.. nonce: WCDCjt
.. section: Library

Avoid plistlib deprecation warning in platform.mac_ver().

..

.. bpo: 14455
.. date: 8221
.. nonce: CDaul1
.. section: Library

Fix some problems with the new binary plist support in plistlib.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 8220
.. nonce: 9m6ZhV
.. section: IDLE

Add Python version to Idle editor window title bar. Original patches by
Edmond Burnett and Kent Johnson.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 8219
.. nonce: d87SuA
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now ignores the source encoding declaration on the second line if the
first line contains anything except a comment.

..

.. bpo: 20358
.. date: 8218
.. nonce: e2PP3S
.. section: Tests

Tests for curses.window.overlay and curses.window.overwrite no longer
specify min{row,col} > max{row,col}.

..

.. bpo: 19804
.. date: 8217
.. nonce: xIHIl7
.. section: Tests

The test_find_mac test in test_uuid is now skipped if the ifconfig
executable is not available.

..

.. bpo: 19886
.. date: 8216
.. nonce: nqDFRC
.. section: Tests

Use better estimated memory requirements for bigmem tests.

..

.. bpo: 20390
.. date: 8215
.. nonce: QXEDu6
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic's "file" output preset now defaults to
"{dirname}/clinic/{basename}.h".

..

.. bpo: 20390
.. date: 8214
.. nonce: 7f_5Hn
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic's "class" directive syntax has been extended with two new
required arguments: "typedef" and "type_object".

..

.. bpo: 20390
.. date: 8213
.. nonce: mDzhDq
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic: If __new__ or __init__ functions didn't use kwargs (or
args), the PyArg_NoKeywords (or PyArg_NoPositional) calls generated are only
run when the type object is an exact match.

..

.. bpo: 20390
.. date: 8212
.. nonce: Feo6X8
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now fails if you have required parameters after optional
parameters.

..

.. bpo: 20390
.. date: 8211
.. nonce: DrPQn0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic converters now have a new template they can inject code
into: "modifiers".  Code put there is run in the parsing function after
argument parsing but before the call to the impl.

..

.. bpo: 20376
.. date: 8210
.. nonce: Xq3E4A
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now escapes backslashes in docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 20381
.. date: 8209
.. nonce: _wqg4-
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now sanity checks the default argument when c_default is
also specified, providing a nice failure message for disallowed values.

..

.. bpo: 20189
.. date: 8208
.. nonce: zdiKDh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now ensures that parser functions for __new__ are always of
type newfunc, the type of the tp_new slot. Similarly, parser functions for
__init__ are now always of type initproc, the type of tp_init.

..

.. bpo: 20189
.. date: 8207
.. nonce: a1Tfvj
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now suppresses the docstring for __new__ and __init__
functions if no docstring is provided in the input.

..

.. bpo: 20189
.. date: 8206
.. nonce: uWF8XZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now suppresses the "self" parameter in the impl for
@staticmethod functions.

..

.. bpo: 20294
.. date: 8205
.. nonce: XeuO9b
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports argument parsing for __new__ and __init__
functions.

..

.. bpo: 20299
.. date: 8204
.. nonce: yLslQI
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic custom converters may now change the default value of
c_default and py_default with a class member.

..

.. bpo: 20287
.. date: 8203
.. nonce: ACjrv7
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic's output is now configurable, allowing delaying its output
or even redirecting it to a separate file.

..

.. bpo: 20226
.. date: 8202
.. nonce: GKAbRe
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now permits simple expressions (e.g. "sys.maxsize - 1") as
default values for parameters.

..

.. bpo: 19936
.. date: 8201
.. nonce: BLtXkq
.. section: Tools/Demos

Added executable bits or shebang lines to Python scripts which requires
them.  Disable executable bits and shebang lines in test and benchmark files
in order to prevent using a random system python, and in source files of
modules which don't provide command line interface.  Fixed shebang lines in
the unittestgui and checkpip scripts.

..

.. bpo: 20268
.. date: 8200
.. nonce: _-GWRe
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports cloning the parameters and return converter of
existing functions.

..

.. bpo: 20228
.. date: 8199
.. nonce: pQeW8t
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now has special support for class special methods.

..

.. bpo: 20214
.. date: 8198
.. nonce: OoBv_8
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed a number of small issues and documentation errors in Argument Clinic
(see issue for details).

..

.. bpo: 20196
.. date: 8197
.. nonce: BhK2gF
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed a bug where Argument Clinic did not generate correct parsing code for
functions with positional-only parameters where all arguments are optional.

..

.. bpo: 18960
.. date: 8196
.. nonce: vONLqA
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now ignore the source encoding
declaration on the second line if the first line contains anything except a
comment.

..

.. bpo: 19723
.. date: 8195
.. nonce: LApk5w
.. section: Tools/Demos

The marker comments Argument Clinic uses have been changed to improve
readability.

..

.. bpo: 20157
.. date: 8194
.. nonce: SvrlOc
.. section: Tools/Demos

When Argument Clinic renames a parameter because its name collides with a C
keyword, it no longer exposes that rename to PyArg_Parse.

..

.. bpo: 20141
.. date: 8193
.. nonce: uYixKR
.. section: Tools/Demos

Improved Argument Clinic's support for the PyArg_Parse "O!" format unit.

..

.. bpo: 20144
.. date: 8192
.. nonce: jUfrSz
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports simple symbolic constants as parameter default
values.

..

.. bpo: 20143
.. date: 8191
.. nonce: XvGuQk
.. section: Tools/Demos

The line numbers reported in Argument Clinic errors are now more accurate.

..

.. bpo: 20142
.. date: 8190
.. nonce: FdECT9
.. section: Tools/Demos

Py_buffer variables generated by Argument Clinic are now initialized with a
default value.

..

.. bpo: 12837
.. date: 8189
.. nonce: nsgduf
.. section: Build

Silence a tautological comparison warning on OS X under Clang in
socketmodule.c.
