.. bpo: 18818
.. date: 7851
.. nonce: fsZ51D
.. release date: 2013-09-29
.. section: Core and Builtins

The "encodingname" part of PYTHONIOENCODING is now optional.

..

.. bpo: 19098
.. date: 7850
.. nonce: 5XU9uv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent overflow in the compiler when the recursion limit is set absurdly
high.

..

.. bpo: 18929
.. date: 7849
.. nonce: xt9_At
.. section: Library

`inspect.classify_class_attrs()` now correctly finds class attributes
returned by `dir()` that are located in the metaclass.

..

.. bpo: 18950
.. date: 7848
.. nonce: DHn3qf
.. section: Library

Fix miscellaneous bugs in the sunau module. Au_read.readframes() now updates
current file position and reads correct number of frames from multichannel
stream.  Au_write.writeframesraw() now correctly updates current file
position.  Au_read.getnframes() now returns an integer (as in Python 2).
Au_read and Au_write now correctly works with file object if start file
position is not a zero.

..

.. bpo: 18594
.. date: 7847
.. nonce: Dm34qD
.. section: Library

The fast path for collections.Counter() was never taken due to an over-
restrictive type check.

..

.. bpo: 19053
.. date: 7846
.. nonce: DkcFZ8
.. section: Library

ZipExtFile.read1() with non-zero argument no more returns empty bytes until
end of data.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7845
.. nonce: x-7joT
.. section: Library

logging: added support for Unix domain sockets to SocketHandler and
DatagramHandler.

..

.. bpo: 18996
.. date: 7844
.. nonce: 1Waotx
.. section: Library

TestCase.assertEqual() now more cleverly shorten differing strings in error
report.

..

.. bpo: 19034
.. date: 7843
.. nonce: S5MyMF
.. section: Library

repr() for tkinter.Tcl_Obj now exposes string reperesentation.

..

.. bpo: 18978
.. date: 7842
.. nonce: qyLkAY
.. section: Library

``urllib.request.Request`` now allows the method to be indicated on the
class and no longer sets it to None in ``__init__``.

..

.. bpo: 18626
.. date: 7841
.. nonce: X3HiU3
.. section: Library

the inspect module now offers a basic command line introspection interface
(Initial patch by Claudiu Popa)

..

.. bpo: 3015
.. date: 7840
.. nonce: Db5Zwa
.. section: Library

Fixed tkinter with wantobject=False.  Any Tcl command call returned empty
string.

..

.. bpo: 19037
.. date: 7839
.. nonce: OfBhoU
.. section: Library

The mailbox module now makes all changes to maildir files before moving them
into place, to avoid race conditions with other programs that may be
accessing the maildir directory.

..

.. bpo: 14984
.. date: 7838
.. nonce: iRbFp4
.. section: Library

On POSIX systems, when netrc is called without a filename argument (and
therefore is reading the user's $HOME/.netrc file), it now enforces the same
security rules as typical ftp clients: the .netrc file must be owned by the
user that owns the process and must not be readable by any other user.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 7837
.. nonce: 3ezwXm
.. section: Library

The tokenize module now detects Python source code encoding only in comment
lines.

..

.. bpo: 17764
.. date: 7836
.. nonce: czuuKO
.. section: Library

Enable http.server to bind to a user specified network interface.  Patch
contributed by Malte Swart.

..

.. bpo: 18937
.. date: 7835
.. nonce: bcvKgi
.. section: Library

Add an assertLogs() context manager to unittest.TestCase to ensure that a
block of code emits a message using the logging module.

..

.. bpo: 17324
.. date: 7834
.. nonce: 0PkOTi
.. section: Library

Fix http.server's request handling case on trailing '/'. Patch contributed
by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19018
.. date: 7833
.. nonce: mntKOW
.. section: Library

The heapq.merge() function no longer suppresses IndexError in the underlying
iterables.

..

.. bpo: 18784
.. date: 7832
.. nonce: dtzGbX
.. section: Library

The uuid module no longer attempts to load libc via ctypes.CDLL if all the
necessary functions have already been found in libuuid.  Patch by Evgeny
Sologubov.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7831
.. nonce: 22MCfN
.. section: Library

The :envvar:`PYTHONFAULTHANDLER` environment variable now only enables the
faulthandler module if the variable is non-empty. Same behaviour than other
variables like :envvar:`PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE`.

..

.. bpo: 1565525
.. date: 7830
.. nonce: 0rVMB7
.. section: Library

New function ``traceback.clear_frames`` will clear the local variables of
all the stack frames referenced by a traceback object.

..

.. bpo: 18952
.. date: 7829
.. nonce: ysovuf
.. section: Tests

Fix regression in support data downloads introduced when test.support was
converted to a package. Regression noticed by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 7828
.. nonce: dyLPY9
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now detects Python source code encoding only in comment lines.

..

.. bpo: 18988
.. date: 7827
.. nonce: 6CpesW
.. section: IDLE

The "Tab" key now works when a word is already autocompleted.

..

.. bpo: 17003
.. date: 7826
.. nonce: eQGdny
.. section: Documentation

Unified the size argument names in the io module with common practice.

..

.. bpo: 18596
.. date: 7825
.. nonce: TMPNJZ
.. section: Build

Support the use of address sanity checking in recent versions of clang and
GCC by appropriately marking known false alarms in the small object
allocator. Patch contributed by Dhiru Kholia.

..

.. bpo: 18873
.. date: 7824
.. nonce: i_1Tf_
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 and the findnocoding.py script now detect Python source code encoding
only in comment lines.
