.. bpo: 29591
.. date: 2017-07-11-22-26-48
.. nonce: cOeMX-
.. release date: 2017-07-23
.. section: Security

Update expat copy from 2.1.1 to 2.2.0 to get fixes of CVE-2016-0718 and
CVE-2016-4472. See https://sourceforge.net/p/expat/bugs/537/ for more
information.

..

.. bpo: 30694
.. date: 2017-07-11-22-25-24
.. nonce: oOf3Er
.. section: Security

Upgrade expat copy from 2.2.0 to 2.2.1 to get fixes of multiple security
vulnerabilities including: CVE-2017-9233 (External entity infinite loop
DoS), CVE-2016-9063 (Integer overflow, re-fix), CVE-2016-0718 (Fix
regression bugs from 2.2.0's fix to CVE-2016-0718) and CVE-2012-0876
(Counter hash flooding with SipHash).  Note: the CVE-2016-5300 (Use os-
specific entropy sources like getrandom) doesn't impact Python, since Python
already gets entropy from the OS to set the expat secret using
``XML_SetHashSalt()``.

..

.. bpo: 26657
.. date: 2017-07-11-22-07-03
.. nonce: wvpzFD
.. section: Security

Fix directory traversal vulnerability with http.server on Windows. This
fixes a regression that was introduced in 3.3.4rc1 and 3.4.0rc1. Based on
patch by Philipp Hagemeister.

..

.. bpo: 30500
.. date: 2017-07-11-22-02-51
.. nonce: wXUrkQ
.. section: Security

Fix urllib.parse.splithost() to correctly parse fragments. For example,
``splithost('//127.0.0.1#@evil.com/')`` now correctly returns the
``127.0.0.1`` host, instead of treating ``@evil.com`` as the host in an
authentification (``login@host``).

..

.. bpo: 30730
.. date: 02
.. nonce: ZF8XGV
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

Prevent environment variables injection in subprocess on Windows.  Prevent
passing other invalid environment variables and command arguments.

..

.. bpo: 26617
.. date: 2017-07-15-13-55-22
.. nonce: Gh5LvN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when GC runs during weakref callbacks.

..

.. bpo: 27945
.. date: 04
.. nonce: p29r3O
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed various segfaults with dict when input collections are mutated during
searching, inserting or comparing.  Based on patches by Duane Griffin and
Tim Mitchell.

..

.. bpo: 27850
.. date: 01
.. nonce: kIVQ0m
.. section: Library

Remove 3DES from ssl module's default cipher list to counter measure sweet32
attack (CVE-2016-2183).

..

.. bpo: 25008
.. date: 03
.. nonce: CeIzyU
.. section: Documentation

Document smtpd.py as effectively deprecated and add a pointer to aiosmtpd, a
third-party asyncio-based replacement.
