.. bpo: 18942
.. date: 7823
.. nonce: xpMQx7
.. release date: 2013-09-09
.. section: Core and Builtins

sys._debugmallocstats() output was damaged on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 18571
.. date: 7822
.. nonce: hvNoE2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implementation of the PEP 446: file descriptors and file handles are now
created non-inheritable; add functions os.get/set_inheritable(),
os.get/set_handle_inheritable() and socket.socket.get/set_inheritable().

..

.. bpo: 11619
.. date: 7821
.. nonce: r2uijI
.. section: Core and Builtins

The parser and the import machinery do not encode Unicode filenames anymore
on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 18808
.. date: 7820
.. nonce: DicDIV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Non-daemon threads are now automatically joined when a sub-interpreter is
shutdown (it would previously dump a fatal error).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7819
.. nonce: FDR7CW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove support for compiling on systems without getcwd().

..

.. bpo: 18774
.. date: 7818
.. nonce: 4hnKQ1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove last bits of GNU PTH thread code and thread_pth.h.

..

.. bpo: 18771
.. date: 7817
.. nonce: gPhE3D
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add optimization to set object lookups to reduce the cost of hash
collisions.  The core idea is to inspect a second key/hash pair for each
cache line retrieved.

..

.. bpo: 16105
.. date: 7816
.. nonce: L1PWWk
.. section: Core and Builtins

When a signal handler fails to write to the file descriptor registered with
``signal.set_wakeup_fd()``, report an exception instead of ignoring the
error.

..

.. bpo: 18722
.. date: 7815
.. nonce: 6O_dyg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove uses of the "register" keyword in C code.

..

.. bpo: 18667
.. date: 7814
.. nonce: xycqzn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add missing "HAVE_FCHOWNAT" symbol to posix._have_functions.

..

.. bpo: 16499
.. date: 7813
.. nonce: BoV9L7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add command line option for isolated mode.

..

.. bpo: 15301
.. date: 7812
.. nonce: rov_YS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Parsing fd, uid, and gid parameters for builtins in Modules/posixmodule.c is
now far more robust.

..

.. bpo: 18368
.. date: 7811
.. nonce: eZ-IVt
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyOS_StdioReadline() no longer leaks memory when realloc() fail.

..

.. bpo: 17934
.. date: 7810
.. nonce: R2hCWw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a clear() method to frame objects, to help clean up expensive details
(local variables) and break reference cycles.

..

.. bpo: 18780
.. date: 7809
.. nonce: cRO6Nc
.. section: Core and Builtins

%-formatting codes %d, %i, and %u now treat int-subclasses as int (displays
value of int-subclass instead of str(int-subclass) ).

..

.. bpo: 18808
.. date: 7808
.. nonce: rKe4pf
.. section: Library

Thread.join() now waits for the underlying thread state to be destroyed
before returning.  This prevents unpredictable aborts in Py_EndInterpreter()
when some non-daemon threads are still running.

..

.. bpo: 18458
.. date: 7807
.. nonce: XphzAu
.. section: Library

Prevent crashes with newer versions of libedit.  Its readline emulation has
changed from 0-based indexing to 1-based like gnu readline.

..

.. bpo: 18852
.. date: 7806
.. nonce: x1dLH9
.. section: Library

Handle case of ``readline.__doc__`` being ``None`` in the new readline
activation code in ``site.py``.

..

.. bpo: 18672
.. date: 7805
.. nonce: CIblDh
.. section: Library

Fixed format specifiers for Py_ssize_t in debugging output in the _sre
module.

..

.. bpo: 18830
.. date: 7804
.. nonce: 1kmGPa
.. section: Library

inspect.getclasstree() no longer produces duplicate entries even when input
list contains duplicates.

..

.. bpo: 18878
.. date: 7803
.. nonce: VuQM8h
.. section: Library

sunau.open now supports the context management protocol.  Based on patches
by Claudiu Popa and R. David Murray.

..

.. bpo: 18909
.. date: 7802
.. nonce: XSu98N
.. section: Library

Fix _tkinter.tkapp.interpaddr() on Windows 64-bit, don't cast 64-bit pointer
to long (32 bits).

..

.. bpo: 18876
.. date: 7801
.. nonce: 30Ist9
.. section: Library

The FileIO.mode attribute now better reflects the actual mode under which
the file was opened.  Patch by Erik Bray.

..

.. bpo: 16853
.. date: 7800
.. nonce: HyyMyr
.. section: Library

Add new selectors module.

..

.. bpo: 18882
.. date: 7799
.. nonce: Z9cjmU
.. section: Library

Add threading.main_thread() function.

..

.. bpo: 18901
.. date: 7798
.. nonce: CRT02s
.. section: Library

The sunau getparams method now returns a namedtuple rather than a plain
tuple.  Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 17487
.. date: 7797
.. nonce: EziBDf
.. section: Library

The result of the wave getparams method now is pickleable again. Patch by
Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18756
.. date: 7796
.. nonce: DS8ILK
.. section: Library

os.urandom() now uses a lazily-opened persistent file descriptor, so as to
avoid using many file descriptors when run in parallel from multiple
threads.

..

.. bpo: 18418
.. date: 7795
.. nonce: _SFG8w
.. section: Library

After fork(), reinit all threads states, not only active ones. Patch by A.
Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 17974
.. date: 7794
.. nonce: mo7MP0
.. section: Library

Switch unittest from using getopt to using argparse.

..

.. bpo: 11798
.. date: 7793
.. nonce: 0AnJcy
.. section: Library

TestSuite now drops references to own tests after execution.

..

.. bpo: 16611
.. date: 7792
.. nonce: aHrYR1
.. section: Library

http.cookie now correctly parses the 'secure' and 'httponly' cookie flags.

..

.. bpo: 11973
.. date: 7791
.. nonce: uPtBvG
.. section: Library

Fix a problem in kevent. The flags and fflags fields are now properly
handled as unsigned.

..

.. bpo: 18807
.. date: 7790
.. nonce: TnD-vF
.. section: Library

``pyvenv`` now takes a --copies argument allowing copies instead of symlinks
even where symlinks are available and the default.

..

.. bpo: 18538
.. date: 7789
.. nonce: wuWw4M
.. section: Library

``python -m dis`` now uses argparse for argument processing. Patch by
Michele Orrù.

..

.. bpo: 18394
.. date: 7788
.. nonce: 6pOClT
.. section: Library

Close cgi.FieldStorage's optional file.

..

.. bpo: 17702
.. date: 7787
.. nonce: TDPIyM
.. section: Library

On error, os.environb now suppresses the exception context when raising a
new KeyError with the original key.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 7786
.. nonce: TF5mD7
.. section: Library

Fixed some tkinter incompatibilities with Tcl/Tk 8.6.

..

.. bpo: 16809
.. date: 7785
.. nonce: WqSHdP
.. section: Library

Tkinter's splitlist() and split() methods now accept Tcl_Obj argument.

..

.. bpo: 18324
.. date: 7784
.. nonce: 0vkj_r
.. section: Library

set_payload now correctly handles binary input.  This also supersedes the
previous fixes for #14360, #1717, and #16564.

..

.. bpo: 18794
.. date: 7783
.. nonce: A0pB9X
.. section: Library

Add a fileno() method and a closed attribute to select.devpoll objects.

..

.. bpo: 17119
.. date: 7782
.. nonce: KfZ3-l
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflows when processing large strings and tuples in the
tkinter module.

..

.. bpo: 18747
.. date: 7781
.. nonce: tPZkbG
.. section: Library

Re-seed OpenSSL's pseudo-random number generator after fork. A
pthread_atfork() parent handler is used to seed the PRNG with pid, time and
some stack data.

..

.. bpo: 8865
.. date: 7780
.. nonce: cKBSJh
.. section: Library

Concurrent invocation of select.poll.poll() now raises a RuntimeError
exception.  Patch by Christian Schubert.

..

.. bpo: 18777
.. date: 7779
.. nonce: VLsjOw
.. section: Library

The ssl module now uses the new CRYPTO_THREADID API of OpenSSL 1.0.0+
instead of the deprecated CRYPTO id callback function.

..

.. bpo: 18768
.. date: 7778
.. nonce: r3TSCo
.. section: Library

Correct doc string of RAND_edg(). Patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 18178
.. date: 7777
.. nonce: i4hnf-
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes on BSD. dlmalloc.c was compiled twice which broke malloc weak
symbols.

..

.. bpo: 18709
.. date: 7776
.. nonce: DWzpRe
.. section: Library

Fix CVE-2013-4238. The SSL module now handles NULL bytes inside
subjectAltName correctly. Formerly the module has used OpenSSL's
GENERAL_NAME_print() function to get the string representation of ASN.1
strings for ``rfc822Name`` (email), ``dNSName`` (DNS) and
``uniformResourceIdentifier`` (URI).

..

.. bpo: 18701
.. date: 7775
.. nonce: nlDK3r
.. section: Library

Remove support of old CPython versions (<3.0) from C code.

..

.. bpo: 18756
.. date: 7774
.. nonce: moRUfX
.. section: Library

Improve error reporting in os.urandom() when the failure is due to something
else than /dev/urandom not existing (for example, exhausting the file
descriptor limit).

..

.. bpo: 18673
.. date: 7773
.. nonce: fZ5WYI
.. section: Library

Add O_TMPFILE to os module. O_TMPFILE requires Linux kernel 3.11 or newer.
It's only defined on system with 3.11 uapi headers, too.

..

.. bpo: 18532
.. date: 7772
.. nonce: 2hh1ms
.. section: Library

Change the builtin hash algorithms' names to lower case names as promised by
hashlib's documentation.

..

.. bpo: 8713
.. date: 7771
.. nonce: BFXgYS
.. section: Library

add new spwan and forkserver start methods, and new functions
get_all_start_methods, get_start_method, and set_start_method, to
multiprocessing.

..

.. bpo: 18405
.. date: 7770
.. nonce: z6flbp
.. section: Library

Improve the entropy of crypt.mksalt().

..

.. bpo: 12015
.. date: 7769
.. nonce: wImE9r
.. section: Library

The tempfile module now uses a suffix of 8 random characters instead of 6,
to reduce the risk of filename collision. The entropy was reduced when
uppercase letters were removed from the charset used to generate random
characters.

..

.. bpo: 18585
.. date: 7768
.. nonce: fooJpB
.. section: Library

Add :func:`textwrap.shorten` to collapse and truncate a piece of text to a
given length.

..

.. bpo: 18598
.. date: 7767
.. nonce: KRZlim
.. section: Library

Tweak exception message for importlib.import_module() to include the module
name when a key argument is missing.

..

.. bpo: 19151
.. date: 7766
.. nonce: 2MrIlH
.. section: Library

Fix docstring and use of _get_supported_file_loaders() to reflect 2-tuples.

..

.. bpo: 19152
.. date: 7765
.. nonce: 2VYxzU
.. section: Library

Add ExtensionFileLoader.get_filename().

..

.. bpo: 18676
.. date: 7764
.. nonce: WAq1iB
.. section: Library

Change 'positive' to 'non-negative' in queue.py put and get docstrings and
ValueError messages. Patch by Zhongyue Luo

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7763
.. nonce: Q7tLxE
.. section: Library

Fix refcounting issue with extension types in tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 8112
.. date: 7762
.. nonce: J4M-dG
.. section: Library

xlmrpc.server's DocXMLRPCServer server no longer raises an error if methods
have annotations; it now correctly displays the annotations.

..

.. bpo: 18600
.. date: 7761
.. nonce: lnNy-j
.. section: Library

Added policy argument to email.message.Message.as_string, and as_bytes and
__bytes__ methods to Message.

..

.. bpo: 18671
.. date: 7760
.. nonce: ip02-u
.. section: Library

Output more information when logging exceptions occur.

..

.. bpo: 18621
.. date: 7759
.. nonce: uGY0Dw
.. section: Library

Prevent the site module's patched builtins from keeping too many references
alive for too long.

..

.. bpo: 4885
.. date: 7758
.. nonce: tdRzg0
.. section: Library

Add weakref support to mmap objects.  Patch by Valerie Lambert.

..

.. bpo: 8860
.. date: 7757
.. nonce: g3CWcZ
.. section: Library

Fixed rounding in timedelta constructor.

..

.. bpo: 18849
.. date: 7756
.. nonce: Q0kF0R
.. section: Library

Fixed a Windows-specific tempfile bug where collision with an existing
directory caused mkstemp and related APIs to fail instead of retrying.
Report and fix by Vlad Shcherbina.

..

.. bpo: 18920
.. date: 7755
.. nonce: ymifXY
.. section: Library

argparse's default destination for the version action (-v, --version) has
also been changed to stdout, to match the Python executable.

..

.. bpo: 18623
.. date: 7754
.. nonce: ac3L1h
.. section: Tests

Factor out the _SuppressCoreFiles context manager into test.support.  Patch
by Valerie Lambert.

..

.. bpo: 12037
.. date: 7753
.. nonce: pcCgBV
.. section: Tests

Fix test_email for desktop Windows.

..

.. bpo: 15507
.. date: 7752
.. nonce: 3_em_8
.. section: Tests

test_subprocess's test_send_signal could fail if the test runner were run in
an environment where the process inherited an ignore setting for SIGINT.
Restore the SIGINT handler to the desired KeyboardInterrupt raising one
during that test.

..

.. bpo: 16799
.. date: 7751
.. nonce: Z_fDrt
.. section: Tests

Switched from getopt to argparse style in regrtest's argument parsing.
Added more tests for regrtest's argument parsing.

..

.. bpo: 18792
.. date: 7750
.. nonce: 5RkYdK
.. section: Tests

Use "127.0.0.1" or "::1" instead of "localhost" as much as possible, since
"localhost" goes through a DNS lookup under recent Windows versions.

..

.. bpo: 18489
.. date: 7749
.. nonce: nOvxOH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for SearchEngine. Original patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18743
.. date: 7748
.. nonce: 5WKkvu
.. section: Documentation

Fix references to non-existent "StringIO" module.

..

.. bpo: 18783
.. date: 7747
.. nonce: n5K5vI
.. section: Documentation

Removed existing mentions of Python long type in docstrings, error messages
and comments.

..

.. bpo: 1584
.. date: 7746
.. nonce: Lh1ZOs
.. section: Build

Provide configure options to override default search paths for Tcl and Tk
when building _tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 7745
.. nonce: VJKYGf
.. section: Build

Tcl/Tk 8.5.14 is now included with the OS X 10.6+ 64-/32-bit installer.  It
is no longer necessary to install a third-party version of Tcl/Tk 8.5 to
work around the problems in the Apple-supplied Tcl/Tk 8.5 shipped in OS X
10.6 and later releases.

..

.. bpo: 18922
.. date: 7744
.. nonce: xCUCW0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Now The Lib/smtpd.py and Tools/i18n/msgfmt.py scripts write their version
strings to stdout, and not to sderr.
