.. bpo: 20625
.. date: 8341
.. nonce: IA5Cu9
.. release date: 2014-02-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

Parameter names in __annotations__ were not mangled properly. Discovered by
Jonas Wielicki, patch by Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 20261
.. date: 8340
.. nonce: xyA9tG
.. section: Core and Builtins

In pickle, lookup __getnewargs__ and __getnewargs_ex__ on the type of the
object.

..

.. bpo: 20619
.. date: 8339
.. nonce: GtdhSO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Give the AST nodes of keyword-only arguments a column and line number.

..

.. bpo: 20526
.. date: 8338
.. nonce: wZEy32
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert changes of issue #19466 which introduces a regression: don't clear
anymore the state of Python threads early during the Python shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 20710
.. date: 8337
.. nonce: byega8
.. section: Library

The pydoc summary line no longer displays the "self" parameter for bound
methods.

..

.. bpo: 20566
.. date: 8336
.. nonce: R8yrPZ
.. section: Library

Change asyncio.as_completed() to use a Queue, to avoid O(N**2) behavior.

..

.. bpo: 20704
.. date: 8335
.. nonce: QQ4uy4
.. section: Library

Implement new debug API in asyncio. Add new methods
BaseEventLoop.set_debug() and BaseEventLoop.get_debug(). Add support for
setting 'asyncio.tasks._DEBUG' variable with 'PYTHONASYNCIODEBUG'
environment variable.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8334
.. nonce: Ocnov-
.. section: Library

asyncio: Refactoring and fixes: BaseEventLoop.sock_connect() raises an error
if the address is not resolved; use __slots__ in Handle and TimerHandle;
as_completed() and wait() raise TypeError if the passed list of Futures is a
single Future; call_soon() and other 'call_*()' functions raise TypeError if
the passed callback is a coroutine function; _ProactorBasePipeTransport uses
_FlowControlMixin; WriteTransport.set_write_buffer_size() calls
_maybe_pause_protocol() to consider pausing receiving if the watermark
limits have changed; fix _check_resolved_address() for IPv6 address; and
other minor improvements, along with multiple documentation updates.

..

.. bpo: 20684
.. date: 8333
.. nonce: EArKf9
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getfullargspec() to not to follow __wrapped__ chains. Make its
behaviour consistent with bound methods first argument. Patch by Nick
Coghlan and Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 20681
.. date: 8332
.. nonce: O8EUu8
.. section: Library

Add new error handling API in asyncio. New APIs:
loop.set_exception_handler(), loop.default_exception_handler(), and
loop.call_exception_handler().

..

.. bpo: 20673
.. date: 8331
.. nonce: bLJpSo
.. section: Library

Implement support for UNIX Domain Sockets in asyncio. New APIs:
loop.create_unix_connection(), loop.create_unix_server(),
streams.open_unix_connection(), and streams.start_unix_server().

..

.. bpo: 20616
.. date: 8330
.. nonce: 9fIygg
.. section: Library

Add a format() method to tracemalloc.Traceback.

..

.. bpo: 19744
.. date: 8329
.. nonce: fL4Brl
.. section: Library

the ensurepip installation step now just prints a warning to stderr rather
than failing outright if SSL/TLS is unavailable. This allows local
installation of POSIX builds without SSL/TLS support.

..

.. bpo: 20594
.. date: 8328
.. nonce: BVHxPd
.. section: Library

Avoid name clash with the libc function posix_close.

..

.. bpo: 20641
.. date: 8327
.. nonce: kAo-M-
.. section: Build

Run MSI custom actions (pip installation, pyc compilation) with the
NoImpersonate flag, to support elevated execution (UAC).

..

.. bpo: 20221
.. date: 8326
.. nonce: _yAetK
.. section: Build

Removed conflicting (or circular) hypot definition when compiled with VS
2010 or above.  Initial patch by Tabrez Mohammed.

..

.. bpo: 20609
.. date: 8325
.. nonce: IMbrDQ
.. section: Build

Restored the ability to build 64-bit Windows binaries on 32-bit Windows,
which was broken by the change in issue #19788.
