.. bpo: 22258
.. date: 9581
.. nonce: tVwANS
.. release date: 2014-09-22
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the the internal function set_inheritable() on Illumos. This platform
exposes the function ``ioctl(FIOCLEX)``, but calling it fails with errno is
ENOTTY: "Inappropriate ioctl for device". set_inheritable() now falls back
to the slower ``fcntl()`` (``F_GETFD`` and then ``F_SETFD``).

..

.. bpo: 21669
.. date: 9580
.. nonce: DFDrBA
.. section: Core and Builtins

With the aid of heuristics in SyntaxError.__init__, the parser now attempts
to generate more meaningful (or at least more search engine friendly) error
messages when "exec" and "print" are used as statements.

..

.. bpo: 21642
.. date: 9579
.. nonce: -lWoKz
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the conditional if-else expression, allow an integer written with no
space between itself and the ``else`` keyword (e.g. ``True if 42else
False``) to be valid syntax.

..

.. bpo: 21523
.. date: 9578
.. nonce: f_PPYO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix over-pessimistic computation of the stack effect of some opcodes in the
compiler.  This also fixes a quadratic compilation time issue noticeable
when compiling code with a large number of "and" and "or" operators.

..

.. bpo: 21091
.. date: 9577
.. nonce: uNtYPQ
.. section: Library

Fix API bug: email.message.EmailMessage.is_attachment is now a method.
Since EmailMessage is provisional, we can change the API in a maintenance
release, but we use a trick to remain backward compatible with 3.4.0/1.

..

.. bpo: 21079
.. date: 9576
.. nonce: czVcL8
.. section: Library

Fix email.message.EmailMessage.is_attachment to return the correct result
when the header has parameters as well as a value.

..

.. bpo: 22247
.. date: 9575
.. nonce: sGIpR3
.. section: Library

Add NNTPError to nntplib.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 4180
.. date: 9574
.. nonce: QBx0JK
.. section: Library

The warnings registries are now reset when the filters are modified.

..

.. bpo: 22419
.. date: 9573
.. nonce: FqH4aC
.. section: Library

Limit the length of incoming HTTP request in wsgiref server to 65536 bytes
and send a 414 error code for higher lengths. Patch contributed by Devin
Cook.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9572
.. nonce: y7r3O2
.. section: Library

Lax cookie parsing in http.cookies could be a security issue when combined
with non-standard cookie handling in some Web browsers.  Reported by Sergey
Bobrov.

..

.. bpo: 22384
.. date: 9571
.. nonce: -Nl4He
.. section: Library

An exception in Tkinter callback no longer crashes the program when it is
run with pythonw.exe.

..

.. bpo: 22168
.. date: 9570
.. nonce: vLeKWC
.. section: Library

Prevent turtle AttributeError with non-default Canvas on OS X.

..

.. bpo: 21147
.. date: 9569
.. nonce: kXNoOn
.. section: Library

sqlite3 now raises an exception if the request contains a null character
instead of truncate it.  Based on patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 9568
.. nonce: 3vS4LK
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in Tkinter on AIX when called Tcl command with empty string or
tuple argument.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 9567
.. nonce: _CCC4v
.. section: Library

Tkinter now most likely raises MemoryError instead of crash if the memory
allocation fails.

..

.. bpo: 22338
.. date: 9566
.. nonce: rKlCMz
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the json module on memory allocation failure.

..

.. bpo: 22226
.. date: 9565
.. nonce: T1ZMPY
.. section: Library

First letter no longer is stripped from the "status" key in the result of
Treeview.heading().

..

.. bpo: 19524
.. date: 9564
.. nonce: EQJjlF
.. section: Library

Fixed resource leak in the HTTP connection when an invalid response is
received.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22051
.. date: 9563
.. nonce: cUjFqL
.. section: Library

turtledemo no longer reloads examples to re-run them. Initialization of
variables and gui setup should be done in main(), which is called each time
a demo is run, but not on import.

..

.. bpo: 21933
.. date: 9562
.. nonce: IhMjN1
.. section: Library

Turtledemo users can change the code font size with a menu selection or
control(command) '-' or '+' or control-mousewheel. Original patch by Lita
Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21597
.. date: 9561
.. nonce: aPTCWJ
.. section: Library

The separator between the turtledemo text pane and the drawing canvas can
now be grabbed and dragged with a mouse.  The code text pane can be widened
to easily view or copy the full width of the text.  The canvas can be
widened on small screens.  Original patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 18132
.. date: 9560
.. nonce: 2R2nwM
.. section: Library

Turtledemo buttons no longer disappear when the window is shrunk.  Original
patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 22216
.. date: 9559
.. nonce: Cmalu6
.. section: Library

smtplib now resets its state more completely after a quit.  The most obvious
consequence of the previous behavior was a STARTTLS failure during a
connect/starttls/quit/connect/starttls sequence.

..

.. bpo: 22185
.. date: 9558
.. nonce: 1SCCIK
.. section: Library

Fix an occasional RuntimeError in threading.Condition.wait() caused by
mutation of the waiters queue without holding the lock.  Patch by Doug
Zongker.

..

.. bpo: 22182
.. date: 9557
.. nonce: 5EG1Bc
.. section: Library

Use e.args to unpack exceptions correctly in distutils.file_util.move_file.
Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9556
.. nonce: zBfe8J
.. section: Library

The webbrowser module now uses subprocess's start_new_session=True rather
than a potentially risky preexec_fn=os.setsid call.

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 9555
.. nonce: 1utXkg
.. section: Library

Fixed Tkinter images copying operations in NoDefaultRoot mode.

..

.. bpo: 22191
.. date: 9554
.. nonce: PWX4GO
.. section: Library

Fix warnings.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 15696
.. date: 9553
.. nonce: PTwXYJ
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for mmap objects on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 22068
.. date: 9552
.. nonce: wCdaW0
.. section: Library

Avoided reference loops with Variables and Fonts in Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 22165
.. date: 9551
.. nonce: J1np4o
.. section: Library

SimpleHTTPRequestHandler now supports undecodable file names.

..

.. bpo: 8797
.. date: 9550
.. nonce: aJcIPu
.. section: Library

Raise HTTPError on failed Basic Authentication immediately. Initial patch by
Sam Bull.

..

.. bpo: 20729
.. date: 9549
.. nonce: I-1Lap
.. section: Library

Restored the use of lazy iterkeys()/itervalues()/iteritems() in the mailbox
module.

..

.. bpo: 21448
.. date: 9548
.. nonce: THJSYB
.. section: Library

Changed FeedParser feed() to avoid O(N**2) behavior when parsing long line.
Original patch by Raymond Hettinger.

..

.. bpo: 22184
.. date: 9547
.. nonce: UCbSOt
.. section: Library

The functools LRU Cache decorator factory now gives an earlier and clearer
error message when the user forgets the required parameters.

..

.. bpo: 17923
.. date: 9546
.. nonce: YI_QjG
.. section: Library

glob() patterns ending with a slash no longer match non-dirs on AIX.  Based
on patch by Delhallt.

..

.. bpo: 21121
.. date: 9545
.. nonce: ZLsRil
.. section: Library

Don't force 3rd party C extensions to be built with -Werror=declaration-
after-statement.

..

.. bpo: 21975
.. date: 9544
.. nonce: MI8ntO
.. section: Library

Fixed crash when using uninitialized sqlite3.Row (in particular when
unpickling pickled sqlite3.Row).  sqlite3.Row is now initialized in the
__new__() method.

..

.. bpo: 21580
.. date: 9543
.. nonce: QCkeUh
.. section: Library

Now Tkinter correctly handles bytes arguments passed to Tk. In particular
this allows to initialize images from binary data.

..

.. bpo: 17172
.. date: 9542
.. nonce: R_LI_2
.. section: Library

Make turtledemo start as active on OS X even when run with subprocess.
Patch by Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21704
.. date: 9541
.. nonce: gL3ikj
.. section: Library

Fix build error for _multiprocessing when semaphores are not available.
Patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9540
.. nonce: G25tq3
.. section: Library

Fix repr(_socket.socket) on Windows 64-bit: don't fail with OverflowError on
closed socket. repr(socket.socket) already works fine.

..

.. bpo: 16133
.. date: 9539
.. nonce: tYuYQF
.. section: Library

The asynchat.async_chat.handle_read() method now ignores BlockingIOError
exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 22044
.. date: 9538
.. nonce: t09GRU
.. section: Library

Fixed premature DECREF in call_tzinfo_method. Patch by Tom Flanagan.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 9537
.. nonce: 6cbo0V
.. section: Library

readline: Disable the meta modifier key if stdout is not a terminal to not
write the ANSI sequence "\033[1034h" into stdout. This sequence is used on
some terminal (ex: TERM=xterm-256color") to enable support of 8 bit
characters.

..

.. bpo: 21888
.. date: 9536
.. nonce: danlpz
.. section: Library

plistlib's load() and loads() now work if the fmt parameter is specified.

..

.. bpo: 21044
.. date: 9535
.. nonce: 16xo9u
.. section: Library

tarfile.open() now handles fileobj with an integer 'name' attribute.  Based
on patch by Antoine Pietri.

..

.. bpo: 21867
.. date: 9534
.. nonce: Ui-F3o
.. section: Library

Prevent turtle crash due to invalid undo buffer size.

..

.. bpo: 19076
.. date: 9533
.. nonce: xCoIai
.. section: Library

Don't pass the redundant 'file' argument to self.error().

..

.. bpo: 21942
.. date: 9532
.. nonce: TLOS41
.. section: Library

Fixed source file viewing in pydoc's server mode on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 11259
.. date: 9531
.. nonce: GxfYnE
.. section: Library

asynchat.async_chat().set_terminator() now raises a ValueError if the number
of received bytes is negative.

..

.. bpo: 12523
.. date: 9530
.. nonce: XBdAky
.. section: Library

asynchat.async_chat.push() now raises a TypeError if it doesn't get a bytes
string

..

.. bpo: 21707
.. date: 9529
.. nonce: rrY_wd
.. section: Library

Add missing kwonlyargcount argument to ModuleFinder.replace_paths_in_code().

..

.. bpo: 20639
.. date: 9528
.. nonce: YdvOpp
.. section: Library

calling Path.with_suffix('') allows removing the suffix again.  Patch by
July Tikhonov.

..

.. bpo: 21714
.. date: 9527
.. nonce: HhkGXW
.. section: Library

Disallow the construction of invalid paths using Path.with_name().  Original
patch by Antony Lee.

..

.. bpo: 21897
.. date: 9526
.. nonce: kiOGHe
.. section: Library

Fix a crash with the f_locals attribute with closure variables when
frame.clear() has been called.

..

.. bpo: 21151
.. date: 9525
.. nonce: o7IuiD
.. section: Library

Fixed a segfault in the winreg module when ``None`` is passed as a
``REG_BINARY`` value to SetValueEx.  Patch by John Ehresman.

..

.. bpo: 21090
.. date: 9524
.. nonce: 20Ooif
.. section: Library

io.FileIO.readall() does not ignore I/O errors anymore. Before, it ignored
I/O errors if at least the first C call read() succeed.

..

.. bpo: 21781
.. date: 9523
.. nonce: u_oiv9
.. section: Library

ssl.RAND_add() now supports strings longer than 2 GB.

..

.. bpo: 11453
.. date: 9522
.. nonce: 53Gr_R
.. section: Library

asyncore: emit a ResourceWarning when an unclosed file_wrapper object is
destroyed. The destructor now closes the file if needed. The close() method
can now be called twice: the second call does nothing.

..

.. bpo: 21858
.. date: 9521
.. nonce: 0hbFBG
.. section: Library

Better handling of Python exceptions in the sqlite3 module.

..

.. bpo: 21476
.. date: 9520
.. nonce: VN-5pW
.. section: Library

Make sure the email.parser.BytesParser TextIOWrapper is discarded after
parsing, so the input file isn't unexpectedly closed.

..

.. bpo: 21729
.. date: 9519
.. nonce: dk7o_U
.. section: Library

Used the "with" statement in the dbm.dumb module to ensure files closing.
Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 21491
.. date: 9518
.. nonce: Zxmut-
.. section: Library

socketserver: Fix a race condition in child processes reaping.

..

.. bpo: 21832
.. date: 9517
.. nonce: PBA0Uu
.. section: Library

Require named tuple inputs to be exact strings.

..

.. bpo: 19145
.. date: 9516
.. nonce: cRrKpW
.. section: Library

The times argument for itertools.repeat now handles negative values the same
way for keyword arguments as it does for positional arguments.

..

.. bpo: 21812
.. date: 9515
.. nonce: 6T4FsQ
.. section: Library

turtle.shapetransform did not tranform the turtle on the first call.  (Issue
identified and fixed by Lita Cho.)

..

.. bpo: 21635
.. date: 9514
.. nonce: ET3OJZ
.. section: Library

The difflib SequenceMatcher.get_matching_blocks() method cache didn't match
the actual result.  The former was a list of tuples and the latter was a
list of named tuples.

..

.. bpo: 21722
.. date: 9513
.. nonce: WTHuRy
.. section: Library

The distutils "upload" command now exits with a non-zero return code when
uploading fails.  Patch by Martin Dengler.

..

.. bpo: 21723
.. date: 9512
.. nonce: r86fwb
.. section: Library

asyncio.Queue: support any type of number (ex: float) for the maximum size.
Patch written by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 21326
.. date: 9511
.. nonce: Y6iW3s
.. section: Library

Add a new is_closed() method to asyncio.BaseEventLoop. run_forever() and
run_until_complete() methods of asyncio.BaseEventLoop now raise an exception
if the event loop was closed.

..

.. bpo: 21774
.. date: 9510
.. nonce: vxORUY
.. section: Library

Fixed NameError for an incorrect variable reference in the XML Minidom code
for creating processing instructions. (Found and fixed by Claudiu Popa.)

..

.. bpo: 21766
.. date: 9509
.. nonce: 0xk_xC
.. section: Library

Prevent a security hole in CGIHTTPServer by URL unquoting paths before
checking for a CGI script at that path.

..

.. bpo: 21310
.. date: 9508
.. nonce: 2mjByJ
.. section: Library

Fixed possible resource leak in failed open().

..

.. bpo: 21677
.. date: 9507
.. nonce: 58CDDD
.. section: Library

Fixed chaining nonnormalized exceptions in io close() methods.

..

.. bpo: 11709
.. date: 9506
.. nonce: JdObvL
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc.help function to not fail when sys.stdin is not a valid file.

..

.. bpo: 13223
.. date: 9505
.. nonce: 9AzEbN
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.writedoc so that the HTML documentation for methods that use
'self' in the example code is generated correctly.

..

.. bpo: 21463
.. date: 9504
.. nonce: 09PsgH
.. section: Library

In urllib.request, fix pruning of the FTP cache.

..

.. bpo: 21618
.. date: 9503
.. nonce: 3Z7WS3
.. section: Library

The subprocess module could fail to close open fds that were inherited by
the calling process and already higher than POSIX resource limits would
otherwise allow.  On systems with a functioning /proc/self/fd or /dev/fd
interface the max is now ignored and all fds are closed.

..

.. bpo: 21552
.. date: 9502
.. nonce: uVy4tM
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow of too long string lengths in the tkinter
module on 64-bit platforms.

..

.. bpo: 14315
.. date: 9501
.. nonce: YzZzS8
.. section: Library

The zipfile module now ignores extra fields in the central directory that
are too short to be parsed instead of letting a struct.unpack error bubble
up as this "bad data" appears in many real world zip files in the wild and
is ignored by other zip tools.

..

.. bpo: 21402
.. date: 9500
.. nonce: 51vDXt
.. section: Library

tkinter.ttk now works when default root window is not set.

..

.. bpo: 10203
.. date: 9499
.. nonce: zgr0hh
.. section: Library

sqlite3.Row now truly supports sequence protocol.  In particular it supports
reverse() and negative indices.  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18807
.. date: 9498
.. nonce: XP7p8B
.. section: Library

If copying (no symlinks) specified for a venv, then the python interpreter
aliases (python, python3) are now created by copying rather than symlinking.

..

.. bpo: 14710
.. date: 9497
.. nonce: x7-soG
.. section: Library

pkgutil.get_loader() no longer raises an exception when None is found in
sys.modules.

..

.. bpo: 14710
.. date: 9496
.. nonce: ZWaxa5
.. section: Library

pkgutil.find_loader() no longer raises an exception when a module doesn't
exist.

..

.. bpo: 21481
.. date: 9495
.. nonce: YDrlf7
.. section: Library

Argparse equality and inequality tests now return NotImplemented when
comparing to an unknown type.

..

.. bpo: 8743
.. date: 9494
.. nonce: I6_2r3
.. section: Library

Fix interoperability between set objects and the collections.Set() abstract
base class.

..

.. bpo: 13355
.. date: 9493
.. nonce: gCByXK
.. section: Library

random.triangular() no longer fails with a ZeroDivisionError when low equals
high.

..

.. bpo: 21538
.. date: 9492
.. nonce: Q60FWA
.. section: Library

The plistlib module now supports loading of binary plist files when
reference or offset size is not a power of two.

..

.. bpo: 21801
.. date: 9491
.. nonce: rzfhYl
.. section: Library

Validate that __signature__ is None or an instance of Signature.

..

.. bpo: 21923
.. date: 9490
.. nonce: hXnoZa
.. section: Library

Prevent AttributeError in distutils.sysconfig.customize_compiler due to
possible uninitialized _config_vars.

..

.. bpo: 21323
.. date: 9489
.. nonce: quiWfl
.. section: Library

Fix http.server to again handle scripts in CGI subdirectories, broken by the
fix for security issue #19435.  Patch by Zach Byrne.

..

.. bpo: 22176
.. date: 9488
.. nonce: rgbRyg
.. section: Library

Update the ctypes module's libffi to v3.1.  This release adds support for
the Linux AArch64 and POWERPC ELF ABIv2 little endian architectures.

..

.. bpo: 15661
.. date: 9487
.. nonce: i1O-4J
.. section: Build

python.org OS X installers are now distributed as signed installer packages
compatible with the Gatekeeper security feature.

..

.. bpo: 21958
.. date: 9486
.. nonce: 3rq4qR
.. section: Build

Define HAVE_ROUND when building with Visual Studio 2013 and above.  Patch by
Zachary Turner.

..

.. bpo: 15759
.. date: 9485
.. nonce: iGLR6O
.. section: Build

"make suspicious", "make linkcheck" and "make doctest" in Doc/ now display
special message when and only when there are failures.

..

.. bpo: 17095
.. date: 9484
.. nonce: -XEBIU
.. section: Build

Fix Modules/Setup *shared* support.

..

.. bpo: 21811
.. date: 9483
.. nonce: 3_Xyr-
.. section: Build

Anticipated fixes to support OS X versions > 10.9.

..

.. bpo: 21166
.. date: 9482
.. nonce: KAl7aO
.. section: Build

Prevent possible segfaults and other random failures of python --generate-
posix-vars in pybuilddir.txt build target.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 9481
.. nonce: I4vHFh
.. section: IDLE

Adjust Editor window title; remove 'Python', move version to end.

..

.. bpo: 14105
.. date: 9480
.. nonce: 0YozkO
.. section: IDLE

Idle debugger breakpoints no longer disappear when inseting or deleting
lines.

..

.. bpo: 17172
.. date: 9479
.. nonce: R8jkU1
.. section: IDLE

Turtledemo can now be run from Idle. Currently, the entry is on the Help
menu, but it may move to Run. Patch by Ramchandra Apt and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21765
.. date: 9478
.. nonce: JyiDbd
.. section: IDLE

Add support for non-ascii identifiers to HyperParser.

..

.. bpo: 21940
.. date: 9477
.. nonce: VlIRz7
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for WidgetRedirector. Initial patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18592
.. date: 9476
.. nonce: sMG-SZ
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for SearchDialogBase. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 21694
.. date: 9475
.. nonce: 1oLmRo
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for ParenMatch. Patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 21686
.. date: 9474
.. nonce: TAkFB0
.. section: IDLE

add unittest for HyperParser. Original patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 12387
.. date: 9473
.. nonce: XO7Ozk
.. section: IDLE

Add missing upper(lower)case versions of default Windows key bindings for
Idle so Caps Lock does not disable them. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 21695
.. date: 9472
.. nonce: g-t0Tm
.. section: IDLE

Closing a Find-in-files output window while the search is still in progress
no longer closes Idle.

..

.. bpo: 18910
.. date: 9471
.. nonce: ke8lMK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for textView. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18292
.. date: 9470
.. nonce: ks_3wm
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoExpand. Patch by Saihadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18409
.. date: 9469
.. nonce: 7fe-aK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoComplete. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 22166
.. date: 9468
.. nonce: sZYhmv
.. section: Tests

With the assistance of a new internal _codecs._forget_codec helping
function, test_codecs now clears the encoding caches to avoid the appearance
of a reference leak

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 9467
.. nonce: ginJSI
.. section: Tests

Tkinter tests now don't reuse default root window.  New root window is
created for every test class.

..

.. bpo: 20746
.. date: 9466
.. nonce: N2pzAY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_pdb to run in refleak mode (-R).  Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 22060
.. date: 9465
.. nonce: TduJNO
.. section: Tests

test_ctypes has been somewhat cleaned up and simplified; it now uses
unittest test discovery to find its tests.

..

.. bpo: 22104
.. date: 9464
.. nonce: -YYDup
.. section: Tests

regrtest.py no longer holds a reference to the suite of tests loaded from
test modules that don't define test_main().

..

.. bpo: 22002
.. date: 9463
.. nonce: jpiaA2
.. section: Tests

Added ``load_package_tests`` function to test.support and used it to
implement/augment test discovery in test_asyncio, test_email,
test_importlib, test_json, and test_tools.

..

.. bpo: 21976
.. date: 9462
.. nonce: Slq6se
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl to accept LibreSSL version strings.  Thanks to William Orr.

..

.. bpo: 21918
.. date: 9461
.. nonce: QTFFSj
.. section: Tests

Converted test_tools from a module to a package containing separate test
files for each tested script.

..

.. bpo: 20155
.. date: 9460
.. nonce: nphzS3
.. section: Tests

Changed HTTP method names in failing tests in test_httpservers so that
packet filtering software (specifically Windows Base Filtering Engine) does
not interfere with the transaction semantics expected by the tests.

..

.. bpo: 19493
.. date: 9459
.. nonce: SwbzLQ
.. section: Tests

Refactored the ctypes test package to skip tests explicitly rather than
silently.

..

.. bpo: 18492
.. date: 9458
.. nonce: ylPRU7
.. section: Tests

All resources are now allowed when tests are not run by regrtest.py.

..

.. bpo: 21634
.. date: 9457
.. nonce: Eng06F
.. section: Tests

Fix pystone micro-benchmark: use floor division instead of true division to
benchmark integers instead of floating point numbers. Set pystone version to
1.2. Patch written by Lennart Regebro.

..

.. bpo: 21605
.. date: 9456
.. nonce: qsLV8d
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tkinter images.

..

.. bpo: 21493
.. date: 9455
.. nonce: NqhRsy
.. section: Tests

Added test for ntpath.expanduser().  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19925
.. date: 9454
.. nonce: dhMx08
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the spwd module. Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 21522
.. date: 9453
.. nonce: b-VwFW
.. section: Tests

Added Tkinter tests for Listbox.itemconfigure(),
PanedWindow.paneconfigure(), and Menu.entryconfigure().

..

.. bpo: 21777
.. date: 9452
.. nonce: dtQCWV
.. section: Documentation

The binary sequence methods on bytes and bytearray are now documented
explicitly, rather than assuming users will be able to derive the expected
behaviour from the behaviour of the corresponding str methods.

..

.. bpo: 21671
.. date: 9451
.. nonce: LvzZ52
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1i. (See also:
bpo-22160, CVE-2014-0224)

..

.. bpo: 10747
.. date: 9450
.. nonce: LTWhLn
.. section: Windows

Use versioned labels in the Windows start menu. Patch by Olive Kilburn.

..

.. bpo: 22201
.. date: 9449
.. nonce: k1Awbh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Command-line interface of the zipfile module now correctly extracts ZIP
files with directory entries.  Patch by Ryan Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 21906
.. date: 9448
.. nonce: ZsKy9v
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make Tools/scripts/md5sum.py work in Python 3. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 21629
.. date: 9447
.. nonce: 9kZmQl
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix Argument Clinic's "--converters" feature.
