.. bpo: 25709
.. date: 9969
.. nonce: WwGm2k
.. release date: 2015/12/06
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed problem with in-place string concatenation and utf-8 cache.

..

.. bpo: 24097
.. date: 9968
.. nonce: Vt4E-i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash in object.__reduce__() if slot name is freed inside __getattr__.

..

.. bpo: 24731
.. date: 9967
.. nonce: h9-hnz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on converting objects with special methods __bytes__, __trunc__,
and __float__ returning instances of subclasses of bytes, int, and float to
subclasses of bytes, int, and float correspondingly.

..

.. bpo: 25388
.. date: 9966
.. nonce: zm3uuQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed tokenizer crash when processing undecodable source code with a null
byte.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9965
.. nonce: 90kpuP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Default implementation of __reduce__ and __reduce_ex__ now rejects builtin
types with not defined __new__.

..

.. bpo: 24802
.. date: 9964
.. nonce: Qie066
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid buffer overreads when int(), float(), compile(), exec() and eval() are
passed bytes-like objects.  These objects are not necessarily terminated by
a null byte, but the functions assumed they were.

..

.. bpo: 24402
.. date: 9963
.. nonce: MAgi3X
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix input() to prompt to the redirected stdout when sys.stdout.fileno()
fails.

..

.. bpo: 24806
.. date: 9962
.. nonce: Nb0znT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent builtin types that are not allowed to be subclassed from being
subclassed through multiple inheritance.

..

.. bpo: 24848
.. date: 9961
.. nonce: HlUSuy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a number of bugs in UTF-7 decoding of misformed data.

..

.. bpo: 25280
.. date: 9960
.. nonce: ivTMwd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Import trace messages emitted in verbose (-v) mode are no longer formatted
twice.

..

.. bpo: 25003
.. date: 9959
.. nonce: -bdxOl
.. section: Core and Builtins

os.urandom() doesn't use getentropy() on Solaris because getentropy() is
blocking, whereas os.urandom() should not block. getentropy() is supported
since Solaris 11.3.

..

.. bpo: 25182
.. date: 9958
.. nonce: gBDq-T
.. section: Core and Builtins

The stdprinter (used as sys.stderr before the io module is imported at
startup) now uses the backslashreplace error handler.

..

.. bpo: 24891
.. date: 9957
.. nonce: ddVmHS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a race condition at Python startup if the file descriptor of stdin (0),
stdout (1) or stderr (2) is closed while Python is creating sys.stdin,
sys.stdout and sys.stderr objects. These attributes are now set to None if
the creation of the object failed, instead of raising an OSError exception.
Initial patch written by Marco Paolini.

..

.. bpo: 21167
.. date: 9956
.. nonce: uom-Dq
.. section: Core and Builtins

NAN operations are now handled correctly when python is compiled with ICC
even if -fp-model strict is not specified.

..

.. bpo: 4395
.. date: 9955
.. nonce: JpT0k7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Better testing and documentation of binary operators. Patch by Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 24467
.. date: 9954
.. nonce: BAJ80-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible buffer over-read in bytearray. The bytearray object now
always allocates place for trailing null byte and it's buffer now is always
null-terminated.

..

.. bpo: 24115
.. date: 9953
.. nonce: y9e_MO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update uses of PyObject_IsTrue(), PyObject_Not(), PyObject_IsInstance(),
PyObject_RichCompareBool() and _PyDict_Contains() to check for and handle
errors correctly.

..

.. bpo: 24257
.. date: 9952
.. nonce: UBxshR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed system error in the comparison of faked types.SimpleNamespace.

..

.. bpo: 22939
.. date: 9951
.. nonce: DWA9ls
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed integer overflow in iterator object.  Patch by Clement Rouault.

..

.. bpo: 23985
.. date: 9950
.. nonce: eezPxO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible buffer overrun when deleting a slice from the front of a
bytearray and then appending some other bytes data.

..

.. bpo: 24102
.. date: 9949
.. nonce: 9T6h3m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed exception type checking in standard error handlers.

..

.. bpo: 23757
.. date: 9948
.. nonce: Q9kwY_
.. section: Core and Builtins

PySequence_Tuple() incorrectly called the concrete list API when the data
was a list subclass.

..

.. bpo: 24407
.. date: 9947
.. nonce: GmCBB3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when dict is mutated while being updated.

..

.. bpo: 24096
.. date: 9946
.. nonce: a_Rap7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make warnings.warn_explicit more robust against mutation of the
warnings.filters list.

..

.. bpo: 23996
.. date: 9945
.. nonce: znqcT8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid a crash when a delegated generator raises an unnormalized
StopIteration exception.  Patch by Stefan Behnel.

..

.. bpo: 24022
.. date: 9944
.. nonce: 1l8YBm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix tokenizer crash when processing undecodable source code.

..

.. bpo: 23309
.. date: 9943
.. nonce: Wfnsnz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid a deadlock at shutdown if a daemon thread is aborted while it is
holding a lock to a buffered I/O object, and the main thread tries to use
the same I/O object (typically stdout or stderr).  A fatal error is emitted
instead.

..

.. bpo: 22977
.. date: 9942
.. nonce: hutEse
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed formatting Windows error messages on Wine. Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23803
.. date: 9941
.. nonce: xFvKSx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed str.partition() and str.rpartition() when a separator is wider then
partitioned string.

..

.. bpo: 23192
.. date: 9940
.. nonce: QKqdow
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed generator lambdas.  Patch by Bruno Cauet.

..

.. bpo: 23629
.. date: 9939
.. nonce: r9Mt2C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the default __sizeof__ implementation for variable-sized objects.

..

.. bpo: 24044
.. date: 9938
.. nonce: H7vb6-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible null pointer dereference in list.sort in out of memory
conditions.

..

.. bpo: 21354
.. date: 9937
.. nonce: ZZTe1E
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyCFunction_New function is exposed by python DLL again.

..

.. bpo: 24903
.. date: 9936
.. nonce: 3LBdzb
.. section: Library

Fix regression in number of arguments compileall accepts when '-d' is
specified.  The check on the number of arguments has been dropped completely
as it never worked correctly anyway.

..

.. bpo: 25764
.. date: 9935
.. nonce: 7WWG07
.. section: Library

In the subprocess module, preserve any exception caused by fork() failure
when preexec_fn is used.

..

.. bpo: 6478
.. date: 9934
.. nonce: -Bi9Hb
.. section: Library

_strptime's regexp cache now is reset after changing timezone with
time.tzset().

..

.. bpo: 25177
.. date: 9933
.. nonce: aNR4Ha
.. section: Library

Fixed problem with the mean of very small and very large numbers. As a side
effect, statistics.mean and statistics.variance should be significantly
faster.

..

.. bpo: 25718
.. date: 9932
.. nonce: D9mHZF
.. section: Library

Fixed copying object with state with boolean value is false.

..

.. bpo: 10131
.. date: 9931
.. nonce: a7tptz
.. section: Library

Fixed deep copying of minidom documents.  Based on patch by Marian Ganisin.

..

.. bpo: 25725
.. date: 9930
.. nonce: XIKv3R
.. section: Library

Fixed a reference leak in pickle.loads() when unpickling invalid data
including tuple instructions.

..

.. bpo: 25663
.. date: 9929
.. nonce: Ofwfqa
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, avoid listing duplicate global names, and search
the global namespace before searching builtins.

..

.. bpo: 25688
.. date: 9928
.. nonce: 8P1HOv
.. section: Library

Fixed file leak in ElementTree.iterparse() raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 23914
.. date: 9927
.. nonce: 1sEz4J
.. section: Library

Fixed SystemError raised by unpickler on broken pickle data.

..

.. bpo: 25691
.. date: 9926
.. nonce: ZEaapY
.. section: Library

Fixed crash on deleting ElementTree.Element attributes.

..

.. bpo: 25624
.. date: 9925
.. nonce: ed-fM0
.. section: Library

ZipFile now always writes a ZIP_STORED header for directory entries.  Patch
by Dingyuan Wang.

..

.. bpo: 25583
.. date: 9924
.. nonce: Gk-cim
.. section: Library

Avoid incorrect errors raised by os.makedirs(exist_ok=True) when the OS
gives priority to errors such as EACCES over EEXIST.

..

.. bpo: 25593
.. date: 9923
.. nonce: 56uegI
.. section: Library

Change semantics of EventLoop.stop() in asyncio.

..

.. bpo: 6973
.. date: 9922
.. nonce: nl5cHt
.. section: Library

When we know a subprocess.Popen process has died, do not allow the
send_signal(), terminate(), or kill() methods to do anything as they could
potentially signal a different process.

..

.. bpo: 25578
.. date: 9921
.. nonce: G6S-ft
.. section: Library

Fix (another) memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercer().

..

.. bpo: 25590
.. date: 9920
.. nonce: aCt-yW
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, only call getattr() once per attribute.

..

.. bpo: 25498
.. date: 9919
.. nonce: 75n0LF
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when garbage-collecting ctypes objects created by wrapping a
memoryview.  This was a regression made in 3.4.3.  Based on patch by
Eryksun.

..

.. bpo: 18010
.. date: 9918
.. nonce: Azyf1C
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc web server's module search function to handle exceptions from
importing packages.

..

.. bpo: 25510
.. date: 9917
.. nonce: 79g7LA
.. section: Library

fileinput.FileInput.readline() now returns b'' instead of '' at the end if
the FileInput was opened with binary mode. Patch by Ryosuke Ito.

..

.. bpo: 25530
.. date: 9916
.. nonce: hDFkwu
.. section: Library

Disable the vulnerable SSLv3 protocol by default when creating
ssl.SSLContext.

..

.. bpo: 25569
.. date: 9915
.. nonce: CfvQjK
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercert().

..

.. bpo: 21827
.. date: 9914
.. nonce: k2oreR
.. section: Library

Fixed textwrap.dedent() for the case when largest common whitespace is a
substring of smallest leading whitespace. Based on patch by Robert Li.

..

.. bpo: 25471
.. date: 9913
.. nonce: T0A02M
.. section: Library

Sockets returned from accept() shouldn't appear to be nonblocking.

..

.. bpo: 25441
.. date: 9912
.. nonce: d7zph6
.. section: Library

asyncio: Raise error from drain() when socket is closed.

..

.. bpo: 25411
.. date: 9911
.. nonce: qsJTCb
.. section: Library

Improved Unicode support in SMTPHandler through better use of the email
package. Thanks to user simon04 for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 25380
.. date: 9910
.. nonce: sKZ6-I
.. section: Library

Fixed protocol for the STACK_GLOBAL opcode in pickletools.opcodes.

..

.. bpo: 23972
.. date: 9909
.. nonce: s2g30g
.. section: Library

Updates asyncio datagram create method allowing reuseport and reuseaddr
socket options to be set prior to binding the socket. Mirroring the existing
asyncio create_server method the reuseaddr option for datagram sockets
defaults to True if the O/S is 'posix' (except if the platform is Cygwin).
Patch by Chris Laws.

..

.. bpo: 25304
.. date: 9908
.. nonce: CsmLyI
.. section: Library

Add asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe().  This lets you submit a coroutine to
a loop from another thread, returning a concurrent.futures.Future.  By
Vincent Michel.

..

.. bpo: 25319
.. date: 9907
.. nonce: iyuglv
.. section: Library

When threading.Event is reinitialized, the underlying condition should use a
regular lock rather than a recursive lock.

..

.. bpo: 25232
.. date: 9906
.. nonce: KhKjCE
.. section: Library

Fix CGIRequestHandler to split the query from the URL at the first question
mark (?) rather than the last. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 24657
.. date: 9905
.. nonce: h2Ag7y
.. section: Library

Prevent CGIRequestHandler from collapsing slashes in the query part of the
URL as if it were a path. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 22958
.. date: 9904
.. nonce: Ebu7Gl
.. section: Library

Constructor and update method of weakref.WeakValueDictionary now accept the
self and the dict keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22609
.. date: 9903
.. nonce: fV7hdV
.. section: Library

Constructor of collections.UserDict now accepts the self keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 25262
.. date: 9902
.. nonce: pQS5cB
.. section: Library

Added support for BINBYTES8 opcode in Python implementation of unpickler.
Highest 32 bits of 64-bit size for BINUNICODE8 and BINBYTES8 opcodes no
longer silently ignored on 32-bit platforms in C implementation.

..

.. bpo: 25034
.. date: 9901
.. nonce: eGvOIb
.. section: Library

Fix string.Formatter problem with auto-numbering and nested format_specs.
Patch by Anthon van der Neut.

..

.. bpo: 25233
.. date: 9900
.. nonce: EdZV9x
.. section: Library

Rewrite the guts of asyncio.Queue and asyncio.Semaphore to be more
understandable and correct.

..

.. bpo: 23600
.. date: 9899
.. nonce: 7J_RD5
.. section: Library

Default implementation of tzinfo.fromutc() was returning wrong results in
some cases.

..

.. bpo: 25203
.. date: 9898
.. nonce: IgDEbt
.. section: Library

Failed readline.set_completer_delims() no longer left the module in
inconsistent state.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9897
.. nonce: ww9QSm
.. section: Library

Prevent overflow in _Unpickler_Read.

..

.. bpo: 25047
.. date: 9896
.. nonce: kc8tqx
.. section: Library

The XML encoding declaration written by Element Tree now respects the letter
case given by the user. This restores the ability to write encoding names in
uppercase like "UTF-8", which worked in Python 2.

..

.. bpo: 19143
.. date: 9895
.. nonce: 76SBSO
.. section: Library

platform module now reads Windows version from kernel32.dll to avoid
compatibility shims.

..

.. bpo: 23517
.. date: 9894
.. nonce: T1dqBS
.. section: Library

Fix rounding in fromtimestamp() and utcfromtimestamp() methods of
datetime.datetime: microseconds are now rounded to nearest with ties going
to nearest even integer (ROUND_HALF_EVEN), instead of being rounding towards
zero (ROUND_DOWN). It's important that these methods use the same rounding
mode than datetime.timedelta to keep the property: (datetime(1970,1,1) +
timedelta(seconds=t)) == datetime.utcfromtimestamp(t). It also the rounding
mode used by round(float) for example.

..

.. bpo: 24684
.. date: 9893
.. nonce: t4T77O
.. section: Library

socket.socket.getaddrinfo() now calls PyUnicode_AsEncodedString() instead of
calling the encode() method of the host, to handle correctly custom string
with an encode() method which doesn't return a byte string. The encoder of
the IDNA codec is now called directly instead of calling the encode() method
of the string.

..

.. bpo: 24982
.. date: 9892
.. nonce: sGMMAR
.. section: Library

shutil.make_archive() with the "zip" format now adds entries for directories
(including empty directories) in ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 24857
.. date: 9891
.. nonce: PpJWZ9
.. section: Library

Comparing call_args to a long sequence now correctly returns a boolean
result instead of raising an exception.  Patch by A Kaptur.

..

.. bpo: 25019
.. date: 9890
.. nonce: JQJlOZ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash caused by setting non-string key of expat parser. Based on
patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 24917
.. date: 9889
.. nonce: xaQocz
.. section: Library

time_strftime() buffer over-read.

..

.. bpo: 23144
.. date: 9888
.. nonce: cLf67X
.. section: Library

Make sure that HTMLParser.feed() returns all the data, even when
convert_charrefs is True.

..

.. bpo: 16180
.. date: 9887
.. nonce: 6IUcNS
.. section: Library

Exit pdb if file has syntax error, instead of trapping user in an infinite
loop.  Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 21112
.. date: 9886
.. nonce: vSFU1r
.. section: Library

Fix regression in unittest.expectedFailure on subclasses. Patch from Berker
Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 24931
.. date: 9885
.. nonce: 4vKoWJ
.. section: Library

Instances of subclasses of namedtuples have their own __dict__ which breaks
the inherited __dict__ property and breaks the _asdict() method. Removed the
__dict__ property to prevent the conflict and fixed _asdict().

..

.. bpo: 24764
.. date: 9884
.. nonce: QwFZ2S
.. section: Library

cgi.FieldStorage.read_multi() now ignores the Content-Length header in part
headers. Patch written by Peter Landry and reviewed by Pierre Quentel.

..

.. bpo: 24774
.. date: 9883
.. nonce: xLbskG
.. section: Library

Fix docstring in http.server.test. Patch from Chiu-Hsiang Hsu.

..

.. bpo: 21159
.. date: 9882
.. nonce: ochL5W
.. section: Library

Improve message in configparser.InterpolationMissingOptionError. Patch from
Łukasz Langa.

..

.. bpo: 23888
.. date: 9881
.. nonce: 7gw4oO
.. section: Library

Handle fractional time in cookie expiry. Patch by ssh.

..

.. bpo: 23004
.. date: 9880
.. nonce: xswcPm
.. section: Library

mock_open() now reads binary data correctly when the type of read_data is
bytes.  Initial patch by Aaron Hill.

..

.. bpo: 23652
.. date: 9879
.. nonce: DKQ_7t
.. section: Library

Make it possible to compile the select module against the libc headers from
the Linux Standard Base, which do not include some EPOLL macros.  Patch by
Matt Frank.

..

.. bpo: 22932
.. date: 9878
.. nonce: mPclSJ
.. section: Library

Fix timezones in email.utils.formatdate. Patch from Dmitry Shachnev.

..

.. bpo: 23779
.. date: 9877
.. nonce: ET4JJP
.. section: Library

imaplib raises TypeError if authenticator tries to abort. Patch from Craig
Holmquist.

..

.. bpo: 23319
.. date: 9876
.. nonce: FXyUH-
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes.BigEndianStructure, swap correctly bytes. Patch written by
Matthieu Gautier.

..

.. bpo: 23254
.. date: 9875
.. nonce: zNiy1X
.. section: Library

Document how to close the TCPServer listening socket. Patch from Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 19450
.. date: 9874
.. nonce: VG7T-L
.. section: Library

Update Windows and OS X installer builds to use SQLite 3.8.11.

..

.. bpo: 23441
.. date: 9873
.. nonce: JXt2Yt
.. section: Library

rcompleter now prints a tab character instead of displaying possible
completions for an empty word.  Initial patch by Martin Sekera.

..

.. bpo: 24735
.. date: 9872
.. nonce: tGudHm
.. section: Library

Fix invalid memory access in itertools.combinations_with_replacement().

..

.. bpo: 17527
.. date: 9871
.. nonce: ve9fyw
.. section: Library

Add PATCH to wsgiref.validator. Patch from Luca Sbardella.

..

.. bpo: 24683
.. date: 9870
.. nonce: aJdWEv
.. section: Library

Fixed crashes in _json functions called with arguments of inappropriate
type.

..

.. bpo: 21697
.. date: 9869
.. nonce: jpATha
.. section: Library

shutil.copytree() now correctly handles symbolic links that point to
directories.  Patch by Eduardo Seabra and Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 24620
.. date: 9868
.. nonce: rrnxB-
.. section: Library

Random.setstate() now validates the value of state last element.

..

.. bpo: 22153
.. date: 9867
.. nonce: 6n6yld
.. section: Library

Improve unittest docs. Patch from Martin Panter and evilzero.

..

.. bpo: 24206
.. date: 9866
.. nonce: ffkVHH
.. section: Library

Fixed __eq__ and __ne__ methods of inspect classes.

..

.. bpo: 21750
.. date: 9865
.. nonce: _Ycvgi
.. section: Library

mock_open.read_data can now be read from each instance, as it could in
Python 3.3.

..

.. bpo: 23247
.. date: 9864
.. nonce: nN-K74
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the StreamWriter.reset() of CJK codecs.

..

.. bpo: 18622
.. date: 9863
.. nonce: i6nCCW
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.mock_open().reset_mock would recurse infinitely. Patch from
Nicola Palumbo and Laurent De Buyst.

..

.. bpo: 24608
.. date: 9862
.. nonce: 0TndL0
.. section: Library

chunk.Chunk.read() now always returns bytes, not str.

..

.. bpo: 18684
.. date: 9861
.. nonce: S2es0F
.. section: Library

Fixed reading out of the buffer in the re module.

..

.. bpo: 24259
.. date: 9860
.. nonce: vMAi1A
.. section: Library

tarfile now raises a ReadError if an archive is truncated inside a data
segment.

..

.. bpo: 24552
.. date: 9859
.. nonce: VTO6sf
.. section: Library

Fix use after free in an error case of the _pickle module.

..

.. bpo: 24514
.. date: 9858
.. nonce: _xRb2r
.. section: Library

tarfile now tolerates number fields consisting of only whitespace.

..

.. bpo: 19176
.. date: 9857
.. nonce: 8V6nOK
.. section: Library

Fixed doctype() related bugs in C implementation of ElementTree. A
deprecation warning no longer issued by XMLParser subclass with default
doctype() method.  Direct call of doctype() now issues a warning.  Parser's
doctype() now is not called if target's doctype() is called.  Based on patch
by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 20387
.. date: 9856
.. nonce: aAbWbQ
.. section: Library

Restore semantic round-trip correctness in tokenize/untokenize for tab-
indented blocks.

..

.. bpo: 24456
.. date: 9855
.. nonce: yYSd2u
.. section: Library

Fixed possible buffer over-read in adpcm2lin() and lin2adpcm() functions of
the audioop module.

..

.. bpo: 24336
.. date: 9854
.. nonce: 4a5y1m
.. section: Library

The contextmanager decorator now works with functions with keyword arguments
called "func" and "self".  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 24489
.. date: 9853
.. nonce: GJnMcW
.. section: Library

ensure a previously set C errno doesn't disturb cmath.polar().

..

.. bpo: 5633
.. date: 9852
.. nonce: JNzKZq
.. section: Library

Fixed timeit when the statement is a string and the setup is not.

..

.. bpo: 24326
.. date: 9851
.. nonce: 4t_6Gy
.. section: Library

Fixed audioop.ratecv() with non-default weightB argument. Original patch by
David Moore.

..

.. bpo: 23840
.. date: 9850
.. nonce: mtSbqO
.. section: Library

tokenize.open() now closes the temporary binary file on error to fix a
resource warning.

..

.. bpo: 24257
.. date: 9849
.. nonce: L_efq0
.. section: Library

Fixed segmentation fault in sqlite3.Row constructor with faked cursor type.

..

.. bpo: 22107
.. date: 9848
.. nonce: 2F8k4W
.. section: Library

tempfile.gettempdir() and tempfile.mkdtemp() now try again when a directory
with the chosen name already exists on Windows as well as on Unix.
tempfile.mkstemp() now fails early if parent directory is not valid (not
exists or is a file) on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 6598
.. date: 9847
.. nonce: JdZNDt
.. section: Library

Increased time precision and random number range in email.utils.make_msgid()
to strengthen the uniqueness of the message ID.

..

.. bpo: 24091
.. date: 9846
.. nonce: Jw0-wj
.. section: Library

Fixed various crashes in corner cases in C implementation of ElementTree.

..

.. bpo: 21931
.. date: 9845
.. nonce: t6lGxY
.. section: Library

msilib.FCICreate() now raises TypeError in the case of a bad argument
instead of a ValueError with a bogus FCI error number. Patch by Jeffrey
Armstrong.

..

.. bpo: 23796
.. date: 9844
.. nonce: JJmUnc
.. section: Library

peek and read1 methods of BufferedReader now raise ValueError if they called
on a closed object. Patch by John Hergenroeder.

..

.. bpo: 24521
.. date: 9843
.. nonce: bn4U-y
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflows in the pickle module.

..

.. bpo: 22931
.. date: 9842
.. nonce: 4CuWYD
.. section: Library

Allow '[' and ']' in cookie values.

..

.. bpo: 20274
.. date: 9841
.. nonce: hBst4M
.. section: Library

Remove ignored and erroneous "kwargs" parameters from three METH_VARARGS
methods on _sqlite.Connection.

..

.. bpo: 24094
.. date: 9840
.. nonce: 7T-u7k
.. section: Library

Fix possible crash in json.encode with poorly behaved dict subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9839
.. nonce: oVpSpG
.. section: Library

Asyncio issue 222 / PR 231 (Victor Stinner) -- fix @coroutine functions
without __name__.

..

.. bpo: 9246
.. date: 9838
.. nonce: oM-Ikk
.. section: Library

On POSIX, os.getcwd() now supports paths longer than 1025 bytes. Patch
written by William Orr.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9837
.. nonce: fgX8Qe
.. section: Library

The keywords attribute of functools.partial is now always a dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 24099
.. date: 9836
.. nonce: eLk6AB
.. section: Library

Fix free-after-use bug in heapq's siftup and siftdown functions. (See also:
bpo-24100, bpo-24101)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9835
.. nonce: OuI94b
.. section: Library

Backport collections.deque fixes from Python 3.5.  Prevents reentrant
badness during deletion by deferring the decref until the container has been
restored to a consistent state.

..

.. bpo: 23008
.. date: 9834
.. nonce: OZFCd-
.. section: Library

Fixed resolving attributes with boolean value is False in pydoc.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9833
.. nonce: qpVFD6
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio issue 235: LifoQueue and PriorityQueue's put didn't increment
unfinished tasks (this bug was introduced in 3.4.3 when JoinableQueue was
merged with Queue).

..

.. bpo: 23908
.. date: 9832
.. nonce: jIfoyT
.. section: Library

os functions now reject paths with embedded null character on Windows
instead of silently truncate them.

..

.. bpo: 23728
.. date: 9831
.. nonce: YBmQmV
.. section: Library

binascii.crc_hqx() could return an integer outside of the range 0-0xffff for
empty data.

..

.. bpo: 23811
.. date: 9830
.. nonce: B6tzf9
.. section: Library

Add missing newline to the PyCompileError error message. Patch by Alex
Shkop.

..

.. bpo: 17898
.. date: 9829
.. nonce: EsbCnX
.. section: Library

Fix exception in gettext.py when parsing certain plural forms.

..

.. bpo: 22982
.. date: 9828
.. nonce: xYmG62
.. section: Library

Improve BOM handling when seeking to multiple positions of a writable text
file.

..

.. bpo: 23865
.. date: 9827
.. nonce: PtSLgU
.. section: Library

close() methods in multiple modules now are idempotent and more robust at
shutdown. If they need to release multiple resources, all are released even
if errors occur.

..

.. bpo: 23881
.. date: 9826
.. nonce: yZjl4b
.. section: Library

urllib.request.ftpwrapper constructor now closes the socket if the FTP
connection failed to fix a ResourceWarning.

..

.. bpo: 23400
.. date: 9825
.. nonce: JSh9Z3
.. section: Library

Raise same exception on both Python 2 and 3 if sem_open is not available.
Patch by Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 15133
.. date: 9824
.. nonce: C0QfV8
.. section: Library

_tkinter.tkapp.getboolean() now supports Tcl_Obj and always returns bool.
tkinter.BooleanVar now validates input values (accepted bool, int, str, and
Tcl_Obj).  tkinter.BooleanVar.get() now always returns bool.

..

.. bpo: 23338
.. date: 9823
.. nonce: ZYMGN1
.. section: Library

Fixed formatting ctypes error messages on Cygwin. Patch by Makoto Kato.

..

.. bpo: 16840
.. date: 9822
.. nonce: kKIhPm
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports 64-bit integers added in Tcl 8.4 and arbitrary
precision integers added in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23834
.. date: 9821
.. nonce: fX3TF4
.. section: Library

Fix socket.sendto(), use the C Py_ssize_t type to store the result of
sendto() instead of the C int type.

..

.. bpo: 21526
.. date: 9820
.. nonce: QQEXrR
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports new boolean type in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23838
.. date: 9819
.. nonce: IX6FPX
.. section: Library

linecache now clears the cache and returns an empty result on MemoryError.

..

.. bpo: 18473
.. date: 9818
.. nonce: 89RHm-
.. section: Library

Fixed 2to3 and 3to2 compatible pickle mappings.  Fixed ambigious reverse
mappings.  Added many new mappings.  Import mapping is no longer applied to
modules already mapped with full name mapping.

..

.. bpo: 23745
.. date: 9817
.. nonce: E00Bml
.. section: Library

The new email header parser now handles duplicate MIME parameter names
without error, similar to how get_param behaves.

..

.. bpo: 23792
.. date: 9816
.. nonce: Kfm9-f
.. section: Library

Ignore KeyboardInterrupt when the pydoc pager is active. This mimics the
behavior of the standard unix pagers, and prevents pipepager from shutting
down while the pager itself is still running.

..

.. bpo: 23742
.. date: 9815
.. nonce: _EkAIa
.. section: Library

ntpath.expandvars() no longer loses unbalanced single quotes.

..

.. bpo: 21802
.. date: 9814
.. nonce: ygSM2A
.. section: Library

The reader in BufferedRWPair now is closed even when closing writer failed
in BufferedRWPair.close().

..

.. bpo: 23671
.. date: 9813
.. nonce: N8nc23
.. section: Library

string.Template now allows to specify the "self" parameter as keyword
argument.  string.Formatter now allows to specify the "self" and the
"format_string" parameters as keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 21560
.. date: 9812
.. nonce: lqfYv8
.. section: Library

An attempt to write a data of wrong type no longer cause GzipFile
corruption.  Original patch by Wolfgang Maier.

..

.. bpo: 23647
.. date: 9811
.. nonce: pX2qrx
.. section: Library

Increase impalib's MAXLINE to accommodate modern mailbox sizes.

..

.. bpo: 23539
.. date: 9810
.. nonce: 5BVUim
.. section: Library

If body is None, http.client.HTTPConnection.request now sets Content-Length
to 0 for PUT, POST, and PATCH headers to avoid 411 errors from some web
servers.

..

.. bpo: 22351
.. date: 9809
.. nonce: agB8Y3
.. section: Library

The nntplib.NNTP constructor no longer leaves the connection and socket open
until the garbage collector cleans them up.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23136
.. date: 9808
.. nonce: 1bnpnb
.. section: Library

_strptime now uniformly handles all days in week 0, including Dec 30 of
previous year.  Based on patch by Jim Carroll.

..

.. bpo: 23700
.. date: 9807
.. nonce: VfnWwi
.. section: Library

Iterator of NamedTemporaryFile now keeps a reference to NamedTemporaryFile
instance.  Patch by Bohuslav Kabrda.

..

.. bpo: 22903
.. date: 9806
.. nonce: 2GjTHY
.. section: Library

The fake test case created by unittest.loader when it fails importing a test
module is now picklable.

..

.. bpo: 23568
.. date: 9805
.. nonce: ffzJc7
.. section: Library

Add rdivmod support to MagicMock() objects. Patch by Håkan Lövdahl.

..

.. bpo: 23138
.. date: 9804
.. nonce: 4vMoMZ
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing cookies with absent keys or values in cookiejar. Patch by
Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23051
.. date: 9803
.. nonce: Vi5tCZ
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.Pool methods imap() and imap_unordered() now handle
exceptions raised by an iterator.  Patch by Alon Diamant and Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 22928
.. date: 9802
.. nonce: q2TmY0
.. section: Library

Disabled HTTP header injections in http.client. Original patch by Demian
Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23615
.. date: 9801
.. nonce: 5Kx9k5
.. section: Library

Modules bz2, tarfile and tokenize now can be reloaded with imp.reload().
Patch by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 23476
.. date: 9800
.. nonce: 82QV9I
.. section: Library

In the ssl module, enable OpenSSL's X509_V_FLAG_TRUSTED_FIRST flag on
certificate stores when it is available.

..

.. bpo: 23576
.. date: 9799
.. nonce: 98F-PP
.. section: Library

Avoid stalling in SSL reads when EOF has been reached in the SSL layer but
the underlying connection hasn't been closed.

..

.. bpo: 23504
.. date: 9798
.. nonce: o31h5I
.. section: Library

Added an __all__ to the types module.

..

.. bpo: 20204
.. date: 9797
.. nonce: DorA4b
.. section: Library

Added the __module__ attribute to _tkinter classes.

..

.. bpo: 23521
.. date: 9796
.. nonce: 0UEjfm
.. section: Library

Corrected pure python implementation of timedelta division.

Eliminated OverflowError from timedelta * float for some floats; Corrected
rounding in timedlta true division.

..

.. bpo: 21619
.. date: 9795
.. nonce: uL0SZh
.. section: Library

Popen objects no longer leave a zombie after exit in the with statement if
the pipe was broken.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 6639
.. date: 9794
.. nonce: rmjUmG
.. section: Library

Module-level turtle functions no longer raise TclError after closing the
window.

..

.. bpo: 814253
.. date: 9793
.. nonce: AJWDsY
.. section: Library

Warnings now are raised when group references and conditional group
references are used in lookbehind assertions in regular expressions. (See
also: bpo-9179)

..

.. bpo: 23215
.. date: 9792
.. nonce: VHVSVX
.. section: Library

Multibyte codecs with custom error handlers that ignores errors consumed too
much memory and raised SystemError or MemoryError. Original patch by Aleksi
Torhamo.

..

.. bpo: 5700
.. date: 9791
.. nonce: iA5yzL
.. section: Library

io.FileIO() called flush() after closing the file. flush() was not called in
close() if closefd=False.

..

.. bpo: 23374
.. date: 9790
.. nonce: 8A9LuZ
.. section: Library

Fixed pydoc failure with non-ASCII files when stdout encoding differs from
file system encoding (e.g. on Mac OS).

..

.. bpo: 23481
.. date: 9789
.. nonce: ZWwliG
.. section: Library

Remove RC4 from the SSL module's default cipher list.

..

.. bpo: 21548
.. date: 9788
.. nonce: CmO_Yh
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() and pydoc.apropos() on modules with empty docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 22885
.. date: 9787
.. nonce: p8FnYk
.. section: Library

Fixed arbitrary code execution vulnerability in the dbm.dumb module.
Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 23146
.. date: 9786
.. nonce: PW-O3u
.. section: Library

Fix mishandling of absolute Windows paths with forward slashes in pathlib.

..

.. bpo: 23421
.. date: 9785
.. nonce: eckzoV
.. section: Library

Fixed compression in tarfile CLI.  Patch by wdv4758h.

..

.. bpo: 23367
.. date: 9784
.. nonce: kHnFiz
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflows in the unicodedata module.

..

.. bpo: 23361
.. date: 9783
.. nonce: I_w0-z
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in Windows subprocess creation code.

..

.. bpo: 23801
.. date: 9782
.. nonce: jyJK3z
.. section: Library

Fix issue where cgi.FieldStorage did not always ignore the entire preamble
to a multipart body.

..

.. bpo: 23310
.. date: 9781
.. nonce: GXmFMR
.. section: Library

Fix MagicMock's initializer to work with __methods__, just like
configure_mock().  Patch by Kasia Jachim.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9780
.. nonce: MjNdSC
.. section: Library

asyncio: New event loop APIs: set_task_factory() and get_task_factory().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9779
.. nonce: rVcHXp
.. section: Library

asyncio: async() function is deprecated in favour of ensure_future().

..

.. bpo: 23898
.. date: 9778
.. nonce: OSiZie
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.classify_class_attrs() to support attributes with overloaded
__eq__ and __bool__.  Patch by Mike Bayer.

..

.. bpo: 24298
.. date: 9777
.. nonce: u_TaxI
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.signature() to correctly unwrap wrappers around bound methods.

..

.. bpo: 23572
.. date: 9776
.. nonce: QhQ9RD
.. section: Library

Fixed functools.singledispatch on classes with falsy metaclasses.  Patch by
Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 15348
.. date: 9775
.. nonce: d1Fg01
.. section: IDLE

Stop the debugger engine (normally in a user process) before closing the
debugger window (running in the IDLE process). This prevents the
RuntimeErrors that were being caught and ignored.

..

.. bpo: 24455
.. date: 9774
.. nonce: x6YqtE
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE from hanging when a) closing the shell while the debugger is
active (15347); b) closing the debugger with the [X] button (15348); and c)
activating the debugger when already active (24455). The patch by Mark
Roseman does this by making two changes. 1. Suspend and resume the
gui.interaction method with the tcl vwait mechanism intended for this
purpose (instead of root.mainloop & .quit). 2. In gui.run, allow any
existing interaction to terminate first.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9773
.. nonce: Yp9LRY
.. section: IDLE

Change 'The program' to 'Your program' in an IDLE 'kill program?' message to
make it clearer that the program referred to is the currently running user
program, not IDLE itself.

..

.. bpo: 24750
.. date: 9772
.. nonce: xgsi-K
.. section: IDLE

Improve the appearance of the IDLE editor window status bar. Patch by Mark
Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25313
.. date: 9771
.. nonce: xMXHpO
.. section: IDLE

Change the handling of new built-in text color themes to better address the
compatibility problem introduced by the addition of IDLE Dark. Consistently
use the revised idleConf.CurrentTheme everywhere in idlelib.

..

.. bpo: 24782
.. date: 9770
.. nonce: PCsWad
.. section: IDLE

Extension configuration is now a tab in the IDLE Preferences dialog rather
than a separate dialog.   The former tabs are now a sorted list.  Patch by
Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 22726
.. date: 9769
.. nonce: x8T0dA
.. section: IDLE

Re-activate the config dialog help button with some content about the other
buttons and the new IDLE Dark theme.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 9768
.. nonce: TFPJhr
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now has an 'IDLE Dark' built-in text color theme. It is more or less
IDLE Classic inverted, with a cobalt blue background. Strings, comments,
keywords, ... are still green, red, orange, ... . To use it with IDLEs
released before November 2015, hit the 'Save as New Custom Theme' button and
enter a new name, such as 'Custom Dark'.  The custom theme will work with
any IDLE release, and can be modified.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 9767
.. nonce: 5Llwo4
.. section: IDLE

README.txt is now an idlelib index for IDLE developers and curious users.
The previous user content is now in the IDLE doc chapter. 'IDLE' now means
'Integrated Development and Learning Environment'.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 9766
.. nonce: ZUz9Fn
.. section: IDLE

Users can now set breakpoint colors in Settings -> Custom Highlighting.
Original patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24972
.. date: 9765
.. nonce: uc0uNo
.. section: IDLE

Inactive selection background now matches active selection background, as
configured by users, on all systems.  Found items are now always highlighted
on Windows.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24570
.. date: 9764
.. nonce: s3EkNn
.. section: IDLE

Idle: make calltip and completion boxes appear on Macs affected by a tk
regression.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24988
.. date: 9763
.. nonce: tXqq4T
.. section: IDLE

Idle ScrolledList context menus (used in debugger) now work on Mac Aqua.
Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24801
.. date: 9762
.. nonce: -bj_Ou
.. section: IDLE

Make right-click for context menu work on Mac Aqua. Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25173
.. date: 9761
.. nonce: EZzrPg
.. section: IDLE

Associate tkinter messageboxes with a specific widget. For Mac OSX, make
them a 'sheet'.  Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25198
.. date: 9760
.. nonce: -j_BV7
.. section: IDLE

Enhance the initial html viewer now used for Idle Help. * Properly indent
fixed-pitch text (patch by Mark Roseman). * Give code snippet a very Sphinx-
like light blueish-gray background. * Re-use initial width and height set by
users for shell and editor. * When the Table of Contents (TOC) menu is used,
put the section header at the top of the screen.

..

.. bpo: 25225
.. date: 9759
.. nonce: 9pvdq6
.. section: IDLE

Condense and rewrite Idle doc section on text colors.

..

.. bpo: 21995
.. date: 9758
.. nonce: C5Rmzx
.. section: IDLE

Explain some differences between IDLE and console Python.

..

.. bpo: 22820
.. date: 9757
.. nonce: hix_8X
.. section: IDLE

Explain need for *print* when running file from Idle editor.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 9756
.. nonce: UVMYQq
.. section: IDLE

Doc: augment Idle feature list and no-subprocess section.

..

.. bpo: 25219
.. date: 9755
.. nonce: 8_9DYg
.. section: IDLE

Update doc for Idle command line options. Some were missing and notes were
not correct.

..

.. bpo: 24861
.. date: 9754
.. nonce: Ecg2yT
.. section: IDLE

Most of idlelib is private and subject to change. Use idleib.idle.* to start
Idle. See idlelib.__init__.__doc__.

..

.. bpo: 25199
.. date: 9753
.. nonce: ih7yY3
.. section: IDLE

Idle: add synchronization comments for future maintainers.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 9752
.. nonce: bZtPgJ
.. section: IDLE

Replace help.txt with help.html for Idle doc display. The new
idlelib/help.html is rstripped Doc/build/html/library/idle.html. It looks
better than help.txt and will better document Idle as released. The tkinter
html viewer that works for this file was written by Mark Roseman. The now
unused EditorWindow.HelpDialog class and helt.txt file are deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 24199
.. date: 9751
.. nonce: VKnZEv
.. section: IDLE

Deprecate unused idlelib.idlever with possible removal in 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 24790
.. date: 9750
.. nonce: hD1hlj
.. section: IDLE

Remove extraneous code (which also create 2 & 3 conflicts).

..

.. bpo: 23672
.. date: 9749
.. nonce: 8td2se
.. section: IDLE

Allow Idle to edit and run files with astral chars in name. Patch by Mohd
Sanad Zaki Rizvi.

..

.. bpo: 24745
.. date: 9748
.. nonce: edbziT
.. section: IDLE

Idle editor default font. Switch from Courier to platform-sensitive
TkFixedFont.  This should not affect current customized font selections.  If
there is a problem, edit $HOME/.idlerc/config-main.cfg and remove 'fontxxx'
entries from [Editor Window].  Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 21192
.. date: 9747
.. nonce: CdbipH
.. section: IDLE

Idle editor. When a file is run, put its name in the restart bar. Do not
print false prompts. Original patch by Adnan Umer.

..

.. bpo: 13884
.. date: 9746
.. nonce: vVcO1E
.. section: IDLE

Idle menus. Remove tearoff lines. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 23184
.. date: 9745
.. nonce: G_Cp9v
.. section: IDLE

remove unused names and imports in idlelib. Initial patch by Al Sweigart.

..

.. bpo: 25616
.. date: 9744
.. nonce: Qr-60p
.. section: Tests

Tests for OrderedDict are extracted from test_collections into separate file
test_ordered_dict.

..

.. bpo: 25099
.. date: 9743
.. nonce: tJQOWx
.. section: Tests

Make test_compileall not fail when an entry on sys.path cannot be written to
(commonly seen in administrative installs on Windows).

..

.. bpo: 24751
.. date: 9742
.. nonce: pL2pbj
.. section: Tests

When running regrtest with the ``-w`` command line option, a test run is no
longer marked as a failure if all tests succeed when re-run.

..

.. bpo: 21520
.. date: 9741
.. nonce: FKtvmQ
.. section: Tests

test_zipfile no longer fails if the word 'bad' appears anywhere in the name
of the current directory.

..

.. bpo: 23799
.. date: 9740
.. nonce: XU2xDw
.. section: Tests

Added test.support.start_threads() for running and cleaning up multiple
threads.

..

.. bpo: 22390
.. date: 9739
.. nonce: UPVFnq
.. section: Tests

test.regrtest now emits a warning if temporary files or directories are left
after running a test.

..

.. bpo: 23583
.. date: 9738
.. nonce: bY8AbM
.. section: Tests

Added tests for standard IO streams in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 23445
.. date: 9737
.. nonce: 7fmkYO
.. section: Build

pydebug builds now use "gcc -Og" where possible, to make the resulting
executable faster.

..

.. bpo: 24603
.. date: 9736
.. nonce: u0K8F-
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use OpenSSL1.0.2d and OS X 10.5 installer to use
OpenSSL 1.0.2e.

..

.. bpo: 23998
.. date: 9735
.. nonce: z7mlLW
.. section: C API

PyImport_ReInitLock() now checks for lock allocation error

..

.. bpo: 12067
.. date: 9734
.. nonce: nLD2M-
.. section: Documentation

Rewrite Comparisons section in the Expressions chapter of the language
reference. Some of the details of comparing mixed types were incorrect or
ambiguous. NotImplemented is only relevant at a lower level than the
Expressions chapter. Added details of comparing range() objects, and default
behaviour and consistency suggestions for user-defined classes. Patch from
Andy Maier.

..

.. bpo: 24952
.. date: 9733
.. nonce: RHhFPE
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the default size argument of stack_size() in the "threading" and
"_thread" modules. Patch from Mattip.

..

.. bpo: 24808
.. date: 9732
.. nonce: ux_TKt
.. section: Documentation

Update the types of some PyTypeObject fields. Patch by Joseph Weston.

..

.. bpo: 22812
.. date: 9731
.. nonce: kLCF0G
.. section: Documentation

Fix unittest discovery examples. Patch from Pam McA'Nulty.

..

.. bpo: 24129
.. date: 9730
.. nonce: Imr54z
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the reference documentation for name resolution. This includes
removing the assumption that readers will be familiar with the name
resolution scheme Python used prior to the introduction of lexical scoping
for function namespaces. Patch by Ivan Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 20769
.. date: 9729
.. nonce: ZUc9z9
.. section: Documentation

Improve reload() docs. Patch by Dorian Pula.

..

.. bpo: 23589
.. date: 9728
.. nonce: rjU421
.. section: Documentation

Remove duplicate sentence from the FAQ.  Patch by Yongzhi Pan.

..

.. bpo: 24729
.. date: 9727
.. nonce: PH3A9p
.. section: Documentation

Correct IO tutorial to match implementation regarding encoding parameter to
open function.

..

.. bpo: 24351
.. date: 9726
.. nonce: XeSVl5
.. section: Documentation

Clarify what is meant by "identifier" in the context of string.Template
instances.

..

.. bpo: 22155
.. date: 9725
.. nonce: 9EbOit
.. section: Documentation

Add File Handlers subsection with createfilehandler to tkinter doc.  Remove
obsolete example from FAQ.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 24029
.. date: 9724
.. nonce: M2Bnks
.. section: Documentation

Document the name binding behavior for submodule imports.

..

.. bpo: 24077
.. date: 9723
.. nonce: 48QXOw
.. section: Documentation

Fix typo in man page for -I command option: -s, not -S.

..

.. bpo: 25440
.. date: 9722
.. nonce: 5xhyGr
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix output of python-config --extension-suffix.

..

.. bpo: 23330
.. date: 9721
.. nonce: LTlKDp
.. section: Tools/Demos

h2py now supports arbitrary filenames in #include.

..

.. bpo: 24031
.. date: 9720
.. nonce: duGo88
.. section: Tools/Demos

make patchcheck now supports git checkouts, too.

..

.. bpo: 24306
.. date: 9719
.. nonce: OJn7Rb
.. section: Windows

Sets component ID for launcher to match 3.5 and later to avoid downgrading.

..

.. bpo: 25022
.. date: 9718
.. nonce: vAt_zr
.. section: Windows

Removed very outdated PC/example_nt/ directory.
