.. bpo: 22735
.. date: 9717
.. nonce: mFEX9n
.. release date: 2015-02-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix many edge cases (including crashes) involving custom mro()
implementations.

..

.. bpo: 22896
.. date: 9716
.. nonce: xSDAHK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid using PyObject_AsCharBuffer(), PyObject_AsReadBuffer() and
PyObject_AsWriteBuffer().

..

.. bpo: 21295
.. date: 9715
.. nonce: LYq9nF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert some changes (issue #16795) to AST line numbers and column offsets
that constituted a regression.

..

.. bpo: 21408
.. date: 9714
.. nonce: Lz6P3P
.. section: Core and Builtins

The default __ne__() now returns NotImplemented if __eq__() returned
NotImplemented.  Original patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23321
.. date: 9713
.. nonce: HQelge
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in str.decode() when error handler returned replacment string
longer than mailformed input data.

..

.. bpo: 23048
.. date: 9712
.. nonce: X5BUd3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix jumping out of an infinite while loop in the pdb.

..

.. bpo: 20335
.. date: 9711
.. nonce: YcAPOs
.. section: Core and Builtins

bytes constructor now raises TypeError when encoding or errors is specified
with non-string argument.  Based on patch by Renaud Blanch.

..

.. bpo: 22335
.. date: 9710
.. nonce: DWsXiy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when trying to enlarge a bytearray to 0x7fffffff bytes on a 32-bit
platform.

..

.. bpo: 22653
.. date: 9709
.. nonce: pCNlpv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an assertion failure in debug mode when doing a reentrant dict insertion
in debug mode.

..

.. bpo: 22643
.. date: 9708
.. nonce: xv8xev
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow in Unicode case operations (upper, lower, title,
swapcase, casefold).

..

.. bpo: 22604
.. date: 9707
.. nonce: yii-It
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix assertion error in debug mode when dividing a complex number by
(nan+0j).

..

.. bpo: 22470
.. date: 9706
.. nonce: igrgN2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed integer overflow issues in "backslashreplace", "xmlcharrefreplace",
and "surrogatepass" error handlers.

..

.. bpo: 22520
.. date: 9705
.. nonce: ZPJXSq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking when generating the repr of a unicode object.

..

.. bpo: 22519
.. date: 9704
.. nonce: xvJVg0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking in PyBytes_Repr.

..

.. bpo: 22518
.. date: 9703
.. nonce: C9T6ed
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow issues in latin-1 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 23165
.. date: 9702
.. nonce: lk8uCE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Perform overflow checks before allocating memory in the _Py_char2wchar
function.

..

.. bpo: 23399
.. date: 9701
.. nonce: hXMYgA
.. section: Library

pyvenv creates relative symlinks where possible.

..

.. bpo: 23099
.. date: 9700
.. nonce: ZASrUo
.. section: Library

Closing io.BytesIO with exported buffer is rejected now to prevent
corrupting exported buffer.

..

.. bpo: 23363
.. date: 9699
.. nonce: -koaol
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.permutations.

..

.. bpo: 23364
.. date: 9698
.. nonce: 3yBV-6
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.product.

..

.. bpo: 23366
.. date: 9697
.. nonce: tyAfm8
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in itertools.combinations.

..

.. bpo: 23369
.. date: 9696
.. nonce: nqChyE
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in _json.encode_basestring_ascii.

..

.. bpo: 23353
.. date: 9695
.. nonce: Iytkpc
.. section: Library

Fix the exception handling of generators in PyEval_EvalFrameEx(). At entry,
save or swap the exception state even if PyEval_EvalFrameEx() is called with
throwflag=0. At exit, the exception state is now always restored or swapped,
not only if why is WHY_YIELD or WHY_RETURN. Patch co-written with Antoine
Pitrou.

..

.. bpo: 18518
.. date: 9694
.. nonce: JXgicC
.. section: Library

timeit now rejects statements which can't be compiled outside a function or
a loop (e.g. "return" or "break").

..

.. bpo: 23094
.. date: 9693
.. nonce: -8AXSi
.. section: Library

Fixed readline with frames in Python implementation of pickle.

..

.. bpo: 23268
.. date: 9692
.. nonce: ATtRa5
.. section: Library

Fixed bugs in the comparison of ipaddress classes.

..

.. bpo: 21408
.. date: 9691
.. nonce: 0rI6tx
.. section: Library

Removed incorrect implementations of __ne__() which didn't returned
NotImplemented if __eq__() returned NotImplemented.  The default __ne__()
now works correctly.

..

.. bpo: 19996
.. date: 9690
.. nonce: 2-SiMf
.. section: Library

:class:`email.feedparser.FeedParser` now handles (malformed) headers with no
key rather than assuming the body has started.

..

.. bpo: 23248
.. date: 9689
.. nonce: FjcyCP
.. section: Library

Update ssl error codes from latest OpenSSL git master.

..

.. bpo: 23098
.. date: 9688
.. nonce: 7VwF3K
.. section: Library

64-bit dev_t is now supported in the os module.

..

.. bpo: 23250
.. date: 9687
.. nonce: qNGAUf
.. section: Library

In the http.cookies module, capitalize "HttpOnly" and "Secure" as they are
written in the standard.

..

.. bpo: 23063
.. date: 9686
.. nonce: 9-UJRs
.. section: Library

In the disutils' check command, fix parsing of reST with code or code-block
directives.

..

.. bpo: 23209
.. date: 9685
.. nonce: IXUHjK
.. section: Library

selectors.BaseSelector.close() now clears its internal reference to the
selector mapping to break a reference cycle. Initial patch written by Martin
Richard. (See also: bpo-23225)

..

.. bpo: 21356
.. date: 9684
.. nonce: 8NY75J
.. section: Library

Make ssl.RAND_egd() optional to support LibreSSL. The availability of the
function is checked during the compilation. Patch written by Bernard Spil.

..

.. bpo: 20896
.. date: 9683
.. nonce: jg267Y
.. section: Library

The :func:`ssl.get_server_certificate` function now uses the
:data:`~ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv23` protocol by default, not
:data:`~ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv3`, for maximum compatibility and support platforms
where :data:`~ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv3` support is disabled. (See also: bpo-22935)

..

.. bpo: 23111
.. date: 9682
.. nonce: A34IA4
.. section: Library

In the ftplib, make ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv23 the default protocol version.

..

.. bpo: 23132
.. date: 9681
.. nonce: KpXKjm
.. section: Library

Mitigate regression in speed and clarity in functools.total_ordering.

..

.. bpo: 22585
.. date: 9680
.. nonce: F4BkNo
.. section: Library

On OpenBSD 5.6 and newer, os.urandom() now calls getentropy(), instead of
reading /dev/urandom, to get pseudo-random bytes.

..

.. bpo: 23112
.. date: 9679
.. nonce: dZGf82
.. section: Library

Fix SimpleHTTPServer to correctly carry the query string and fragment when
it redirects to add a trailing slash.

..

.. bpo: 23093
.. date: 9678
.. nonce: cP7OqD
.. section: Library

In the io, module allow more operations to work on detached streams.

..

.. bpo: 19104
.. date: 9677
.. nonce: _eIThy
.. section: Library

pprint now produces evaluable output for wrapped strings.

..

.. bpo: 23071
.. date: 9676
.. nonce: 3BSqF7
.. section: Library

Added missing names to codecs.__all__.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 15513
.. date: 9675
.. nonce: 7yVnRE
.. section: Library

Added a __sizeof__ implementation for pickle classes.

..

.. bpo: 19858
.. date: 9674
.. nonce: cqOlIt
.. section: Library

pickletools.optimize() now aware of the MEMOIZE opcode, can produce more
compact result and no longer produces invalid output if input data contains
MEMOIZE opcodes together with PUT or BINPUT opcodes.

..

.. bpo: 22095
.. date: 9673
.. nonce: iISzxM
.. section: Library

Fixed HTTPConnection.set_tunnel with default port.  The port value in the
host header was set to "None".  Patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23016
.. date: 9672
.. nonce: LyrPd_
.. section: Library

A warning no longer produces an AttributeError when the program is run with
pythonw.exe.

..

.. bpo: 21775
.. date: 9671
.. nonce: Lg9w0U
.. section: Library

shutil.copytree(): fix crash when copying to VFAT. An exception handler
assumed that that OSError objects always have a 'winerror' attribute. That
is not the case, so the exception handler itself raised AttributeError when
run on Linux (and, presumably, any other non-Windows OS). Patch by Greg
Ward.

..

.. bpo: 1218234
.. date: 9670
.. nonce: 4GcoQK
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getsource() to load updated source of reloaded module. Initial
patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 22959
.. date: 9669
.. nonce: Vxt3EP
.. section: Library

In the constructor of http.client.HTTPSConnection, prefer the context's
check_hostname attribute over the *check_hostname* parameter.

..

.. bpo: 16043
.. date: 9668
.. nonce: TGIC7t
.. section: Library

Add a default limit for the amount of data xmlrpclib.gzip_decode will
return. This resolves CVE-2013-1753.

..

.. bpo: 22966
.. date: 9667
.. nonce: zIxDrT
.. section: Library

Fix __pycache__ pyc file name clobber when pyc_compile is asked to compile a
source file containing multiple dots in the source file name.

..

.. bpo: 21971
.. date: 9666
.. nonce: XlTc22
.. section: Library

Update turtledemo doc and add module to the index.

..

.. bpo: 21032
.. date: 9665
.. nonce: wxT_41
.. section: Library

Fixed socket leak if HTTPConnection.getresponse() fails. Original patch by
Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22960
.. date: 9664
.. nonce: 2VDILT
.. section: Library

Add a context argument to xmlrpclib.ServerProxy constructor.

..

.. bpo: 22915
.. date: 9663
.. nonce: 709UAo
.. section: Library

SAX parser now supports files opened with file descriptor or bytes path.

..

.. bpo: 22609
.. date: 9662
.. nonce: mmLoeb
.. section: Library

Constructors and update methods of mapping classes in the collections module
now accept the self keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 22788
.. date: 9661
.. nonce: vofL9e
.. section: Library

Add *context* parameter to logging.handlers.HTTPHandler.

..

.. bpo: 22921
.. date: 9660
.. nonce: a4wx1C
.. section: Library

Allow SSLContext to take the *hostname* parameter even if OpenSSL doesn't
support SNI.

..

.. bpo: 22894
.. date: 9659
.. nonce: 4AkwPA
.. section: Library

TestCase.subTest() would cause the test suite to be stopped when in failfast
mode, even in the absence of failures.

..

.. bpo: 22638
.. date: 9658
.. nonce: Ur73gJ
.. section: Library

SSLv3 is now disabled throughout the standard library. It can still be
enabled by instantiating a SSLContext manually.

..

.. bpo: 22370
.. date: 9657
.. nonce: j4y21u
.. section: Library

Windows detection in pathlib is now more robust.

..

.. bpo: 22841
.. date: 9656
.. nonce: 8wpk7T
.. section: Library

Reject coroutines in asyncio add_signal_handler(). Patch by Ludovic.Gasc.

..

.. bpo: 22849
.. date: 9655
.. nonce: AqBPyj
.. section: Library

Fix possible double free in the io.TextIOWrapper constructor.

..

.. bpo: 12728
.. date: 9654
.. nonce: rHZmXO
.. section: Library

Different Unicode characters having the same uppercase but different
lowercase are now matched in case-insensitive regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22821
.. date: 9653
.. nonce: 30cQ-U
.. section: Library

Fixed fcntl() with integer argument on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 22406
.. date: 9652
.. nonce: sPlVbI
.. section: Library

Fixed the uu_codec codec incorrectly ported to 3.x. Based on patch by Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 17293
.. date: 9651
.. nonce: Hk06bO
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() now determines MAC address on AIX using netstat. Based on
patch by Aivars Kalvāns.

..

.. bpo: 22769
.. date: 9650
.. nonce: PunnvQ
.. section: Library

Fixed ttk.Treeview.tag_has() when called without arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22417
.. date: 9649
.. nonce: To4b7U
.. section: Library

Verify certificates by default in httplib (PEP 476).

..

.. bpo: 22775
.. date: 9648
.. nonce: V5aCUz
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickling of http.cookies.SimpleCookie with protocol 2 and above.
Patch by Tim Graham.

..

.. bpo: 22366
.. date: 9647
.. nonce: u1xjUp
.. section: Library

urllib.request.urlopen will accept a context object (SSLContext) as an
argument which will then used be for HTTPS connection. Patch by Alex Gaynor.

..

.. bpo: 22776
.. date: 9646
.. nonce: xNcRse
.. section: Library

Brought excluded code into the scope of a try block in SysLogHandler.emit().

..

.. bpo: 22665
.. date: 9645
.. nonce: j6Jlp8
.. section: Library

Add missing get_terminal_size and SameFileError to shutil.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 17381
.. date: 9644
.. nonce: 4J5yv7
.. section: Library

Fixed handling of case-insensitive ranges in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22410
.. date: 9643
.. nonce: 99YFdd
.. section: Library

Module level functions in the re module now cache compiled locale-dependent
regular expressions taking into account the locale.

..

.. bpo: 22759
.. date: 9642
.. nonce: BJPdiL
.. section: Library

Query methods on pathlib.Path() (exists(), is_dir(), etc.) now return False
when the underlying stat call raises NotADirectoryError.

..

.. bpo: 8876
.. date: 9641
.. nonce: A83Av4
.. section: Library

distutils now falls back to copying files when hard linking doesn't work.
This allows use with special filesystems such as VirtualBox shared folders.

..

.. bpo: 18853
.. date: 9640
.. nonce: 76DrPD
.. section: Library

Fixed ResourceWarning in shlex.__nain__.

..

.. bpo: 9351
.. date: 9639
.. nonce: u5UI-6
.. section: Library

Defaults set with set_defaults on an argparse subparser are no longer
ignored when also set on the parent parser.

..

.. bpo: 21991
.. date: 9638
.. nonce: Mkm0IN
.. section: Library

Make email.headerregistry's header 'params' attributes be read-only
(MappingProxyType).  Previously the dictionary was modifiable but a new one
was created on each access of the attribute.

..

.. bpo: 22641
.. date: 9637
.. nonce: m0ldtl
.. section: Library

In asyncio, the default SSL context for client connections is now created
using ssl.create_default_context(), for stronger security.

..

.. bpo: 22435
.. date: 9636
.. nonce: Mrmeio
.. section: Library

Fix a file descriptor leak when SocketServer bind fails.

..

.. bpo: 13096
.. date: 9635
.. nonce: rsailB
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault in CTypes POINTER handling of large values.

..

.. bpo: 11694
.. date: 9634
.. nonce: JuDrch
.. section: Library

Raise ConversionError in xdrlib as documented.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński
and Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 22462
.. date: 9633
.. nonce: 1h4Kpr
.. section: Library

Fix pyexpat's creation of a dummy frame to make it appear in exception
tracebacks.

..

.. bpo: 21173
.. date: 9632
.. nonce: egkbEx
.. section: Library

Fix len() on a WeakKeyDictionary when .clear() was called with an iterator
alive.

..

.. bpo: 11866
.. date: 9631
.. nonce: xrvbIC
.. section: Library

Eliminated race condition in the computation of names for new threads.

..

.. bpo: 21905
.. date: 9630
.. nonce: coKyRo
.. section: Library

Avoid RuntimeError in pickle.whichmodule() when sys.modules is mutated while
iterating.  Patch by Olivier Grisel.

..

.. bpo: 22219
.. date: 9629
.. nonce: l9Enh9
.. section: Library

The zipfile module CLI now adds entries for directories (including empty
directories) in ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 22449
.. date: 9628
.. nonce: nFW_Fl
.. section: Library

In the ssl.SSLContext.load_default_certs, consult the environmental
variables SSL_CERT_DIR and SSL_CERT_FILE on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 20076
.. date: 9627
.. nonce: -7OIVB
.. section: Library

Added non derived UTF-8 aliases to locale aliases table.

..

.. bpo: 20079
.. date: 9626
.. nonce: qM949O
.. section: Library

Added locales supported in glibc 2.18 to locale alias table.

..

.. bpo: 22396
.. date: 9625
.. nonce: cQSizA
.. section: Library

On 32-bit AIX platform, don't expose os.posix_fadvise() nor
os.posix_fallocate() because their prototypes in system headers are wrong.

..

.. bpo: 22517
.. date: 9624
.. nonce: SOfMig
.. section: Library

When a io.BufferedRWPair object is deallocated, clear its weakrefs.

..

.. bpo: 22448
.. date: 9623
.. nonce: fAapvE
.. section: Library

Improve canceled timer handles cleanup to prevent unbound memory usage.
Patch by Joshua Moore-Oliva.

..

.. bpo: 23009
.. date: 9622
.. nonce: -sW7gk
.. section: Library

Make sure selectors.EpollSelecrtor.select() works when no FD is registered.

..

.. bpo: 20577
.. date: 9621
.. nonce: Y71IMj
.. section: IDLE

Configuration of the max line length for the FormatParagraph extension has
been moved from the General tab of the Idle preferences dialog to the
FormatParagraph tab of the Config Extensions dialog. Patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 9620
.. nonce: JfHAA4
.. section: IDLE

Update Idle doc chapter to match current Idle and add new information.

..

.. bpo: 3068
.. date: 9619
.. nonce: TYjXTA
.. section: IDLE

Add Idle extension configuration dialog to Options menu. Changes are written
to HOME/.idlerc/config-extensions.cfg. Original patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16233
.. date: 9618
.. nonce: sOadNo
.. section: IDLE

A module browser (File : Class Browser, Alt+C) requires an editor window
with a filename.  When Class Browser is requested otherwise, from a shell,
output window, or 'Untitled' editor, Idle no longer displays an error box.
It now pops up an Open Module box (Alt+M). If a valid name is entered and a
module is opened, a corresponding browser is also opened.

..

.. bpo: 4832
.. date: 9617
.. nonce: GRKi9M
.. section: IDLE

Save As to type Python files automatically adds .py to the name you enter
(even if your system does not display it).  Some systems automatically add
.txt when type is Text files.

..

.. bpo: 21986
.. date: 9616
.. nonce: 04GUv2
.. section: IDLE

Code objects are not normally pickled by the pickle module. To match this,
they are no longer pickled when running under Idle.

..

.. bpo: 23180
.. date: 9615
.. nonce: cE_89F
.. section: IDLE

Rename IDLE "Windows" menu item to "Window". Patch by Al Sweigart.

..

.. bpo: 23392
.. date: 9614
.. nonce: Pe7_WK
.. section: Tests

Added tests for marshal C API that works with FILE*.

..

.. bpo: 18982
.. date: 9613
.. nonce: TynSM6
.. section: Tests

Add tests for CLI of the calendar module.

..

.. bpo: 19548
.. date: 9612
.. nonce: 25Kxq_
.. section: Tests

Added some additional checks to test_codecs to ensure that statements in the
updated documentation remain accurate. Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22838
.. date: 9611
.. nonce: VZBtZg
.. section: Tests

All test_re tests now work with unittest test discovery.

..

.. bpo: 22173
.. date: 9610
.. nonce: dxIIVx
.. section: Tests

Update lib2to3 tests to use unittest test discovery.

..

.. bpo: 16000
.. date: 9609
.. nonce: Y7O6TP
.. section: Tests

Convert test_curses to use unittest.

..

.. bpo: 21456
.. date: 9608
.. nonce: Axsw43
.. section: Tests

Skip two tests in test_urllib2net.py if _ssl module not present. Patch by
Remi Pointel.

..

.. bpo: 22770
.. date: 9607
.. nonce: FxAh91
.. section: Tests

Prevent some Tk segfaults on OS X when running gui tests.

..

.. bpo: 23211
.. date: 9606
.. nonce: Bc-QfJ
.. section: Tests

Workaround test_logging failure on some OS X 10.6 systems.

..

.. bpo: 23345
.. date: 9605
.. nonce: HIGBKx
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_ssl failures with large OpenSSL patch level values (like
0.9.8zc).

..

.. bpo: 22289
.. date: 9604
.. nonce: ybGcC-
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_urllib2net failures due to ftp connection timeout.

..

.. bpo: 15506
.. date: 9603
.. nonce: nh8KlR
.. section: Build

Use standard PKG_PROG_PKG_CONFIG autoconf macro in the configure script.

..

.. bpo: 22935
.. date: 9602
.. nonce: -vY3lc
.. section: Build

Allow the ssl module to be compiled if openssl doesn't support SSL 3.

..

.. bpo: 16537
.. date: 9601
.. nonce: llFo71
.. section: Build

Check whether self.extensions is empty in setup.py. Patch by Jonathan
Hosmer.

..

.. bpo: 18096
.. date: 9600
.. nonce: ELyAUJ
.. section: Build

Fix library order returned by python-config.

..

.. bpo: 17219
.. date: 9599
.. nonce: q8ueQ0
.. section: Build

Add library build dir for Python extension cross-builds.

..

.. bpo: 17128
.. date: 9598
.. nonce: ez_XMv
.. section: Build

Use private version of OpenSSL for 3.4.3 OS X 10.5+ installer.

..

.. bpo: 22079
.. date: 9597
.. nonce: zhs2qM
.. section: C API

PyType_Ready() now checks that statically allocated type has no dynamically
allocated bases.

..

.. bpo: 19548
.. date: 9596
.. nonce: yOX8sS
.. section: Documentation

Update the codecs module documentation to better cover the distinction
between text encodings and other codecs, together with other clarifications.
Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22914
.. date: 9595
.. nonce: T6aGB3
.. section: Documentation

Update the Python 2/3 porting HOWTO to describe a more automated approach.

..

.. bpo: 21514
.. date: 9594
.. nonce: 1H16T6
.. section: Documentation

The documentation of the json module now refers to new JSON RFC 7159 instead
of obsoleted RFC 4627.

..

.. bpo: 22314
.. date: 9593
.. nonce: ws6xsH
.. section: Tools/Demos

pydoc now works when the LINES environment variable is set.

..

.. bpo: 17896
.. date: 9592
.. nonce: o79rHM
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now expect external library sources to be in
``PCbuild\..\externals`` rather than ``PCbuild\..\..``.

..

.. bpo: 17717
.. date: 9591
.. nonce: y1zoye
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now use a copy of NASM pulled from svn.python.org
to build OpenSSL.

..

.. bpo: 22644
.. date: 9590
.. nonce: gosBki
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1j.
