.. bpo: 19255
.. date: 9315
.. nonce: eED7PV
.. release date: 2014-02-10
.. section: Core and Builtins

The builtins module is restored to initial value before cleaning other
modules.  The sys and builtins modules are cleaned last.

..

.. bpo: 20588
.. date: 9314
.. nonce: Yibtu_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make Python-ast.c C89 compliant.

..

.. bpo: 20437
.. date: 9313
.. nonce: Dmstts
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed 22 potential bugs when deleting objects references.

..

.. bpo: 20500
.. date: 9312
.. nonce: BJiIvW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Displaying an exception at interpreter shutdown no longer risks triggering
an assertion failure in PyObject_Str.

..

.. bpo: 20538
.. date: 9311
.. nonce: 7FRDsi
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-7 incremental decoder produced inconsistent string when input was
truncated in BASE64 section.

..

.. bpo: 20404
.. date: 9310
.. nonce: 9dU6on
.. section: Core and Builtins

io.TextIOWrapper (and hence the open() builtin) now uses the internal codec
marking system added for issue #19619 to throw LookupError for known non-
text encodings at stream construction time. The existing output type checks
remain in place to deal with unmarked third party codecs.

..

.. bpo: 17162
.. date: 9309
.. nonce: p4Q-Hw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add PyType_GetSlot.

..

.. bpo: 20162
.. date: 9308
.. nonce: u8qICT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an alignment issue in the siphash24() hash function which caused a crash
on PowerPC 64-bit (ppc64).

..

.. bpo: 20530
.. date: 9307
.. nonce: LXsfhK
.. section: Library

The signatures for slot builtins have been updated to reflect the fact that
they only accept positional-only arguments.

..

.. bpo: 20517
.. date: 9306
.. nonce: 81zuY3
.. section: Library

Functions in the os module that accept two filenames now register both
filenames in the exception on failure.

..

.. bpo: 20563
.. date: 9305
.. nonce: VTqHq5
.. section: Library

The ipaddress module API is now considered stable.

..

.. bpo: 14983
.. date: 9304
.. nonce: H_gs8w
.. section: Library

email.generator now always adds a line end after each MIME boundary marker,
instead of doing so only when there is an epilogue.  This fixes an RFC
compliance bug and solves an issue with signed MIME parts.

..

.. bpo: 20540
.. date: 9303
.. nonce: rhK6IW
.. section: Library

Fix a performance regression (vs. Python 3.2) when layering a
multiprocessing Connection over a TCP socket.  For small payloads, Nagle's
algorithm would introduce idle delays before the entire transmission of a
message.

..

.. bpo: 16983
.. date: 9302
.. nonce: MoPgVQ
.. section: Library

the new email header parsing code will now decode encoded words that are
(incorrectly) surrounded by quotes, and register a defect.

..

.. bpo: 19772
.. date: 9301
.. nonce: pRi-Hm
.. section: Library

email.generator no longer mutates the message object when doing a down-
transform from 8bit to 7bit CTEs.

..

.. bpo: 20536
.. date: 9300
.. nonce: YWe5TG
.. section: Library

the statistics module now correctly handle Decimal instances with positive
exponents

..

.. bpo: 18805
.. date: 9299
.. nonce: fBdyY2
.. section: Library

the netmask/hostmask parsing in ipaddress now more reliably filters out
illegal values and correctly allows any valid prefix length.

..

.. bpo: 20481
.. date: 9298
.. nonce: ycaV9P
.. section: Library

For at least Python 3.4, the statistics module will require that all inputs
for a single operation be of a single consistent type, or else a mixed of
ints and a single other consistent type. This avoids some interoperability
issues that arose with the previous approach of coercing to a suitable
common type.

..

.. bpo: 20478
.. date: 9297
.. nonce: LVoG5Q
.. section: Library

the statistics module now treats collections.Counter inputs like any other
iterable.

..

.. bpo: 17369
.. date: 9296
.. nonce: ZBFAd4
.. section: Library

get_filename was raising an exception if the filename parameter's RFC2231
encoding was broken in certain ways.  This was a regression relative to
python2.

..

.. bpo: 20013
.. date: 9295
.. nonce: erNy8V
.. section: Library

Some imap servers disconnect if the current mailbox is deleted, and imaplib
did not handle that case gracefully.  Now it handles the 'bye' correctly.

..

.. bpo: 20531
.. date: 9294
.. nonce: yz_zOY
.. section: Library

Revert 3.4 version of fix for #19063, and apply the 3.3 version.  That is,
do *not* raise an error if unicode is passed to
email.message.Message.set_payload.

..

.. bpo: 20476
.. date: 9293
.. nonce: VhH-Lc
.. section: Library

If a non-compat32 policy is used with any of the email parsers, EmailMessage
is now used as the factory class.  The factory class should really come from
the policy; that will get fixed in 3.5.

..

.. bpo: 19920
.. date: 9292
.. nonce: _fEm-X
.. section: Library

TarFile.list() no longer fails when outputs a listing containing non-
encodable characters.  Based on patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 20515
.. date: 9291
.. nonce: JrEnar
.. section: Library

Fix NULL pointer dereference introduced by issue #20368.

..

.. bpo: 19186
.. date: 9290
.. nonce: cuiicK
.. section: Library

Restore namespacing of expat symbols inside the pyexpat module.

..

.. bpo: 20053
.. date: 9289
.. nonce: vy5u-i
.. section: Library

ensurepip (and hence venv) are no longer affected by the settings in the
default pip configuration file.

..

.. bpo: 20426
.. date: 9288
.. nonce: f0ozAP
.. section: Library

When passing the re.DEBUG flag, re.compile() displays the debug output every
time it is called, regardless of the compilation cache.

..

.. bpo: 20368
.. date: 9287
.. nonce: I8sm7u
.. section: Library

The null character now correctly passed from Tcl to Python. Improved error
handling in variables-related commands.

..

.. bpo: 20435
.. date: 9286
.. nonce: _UNhlH
.. section: Library

Fix _pyio.StringIO.getvalue() to take into account newline translation
settings.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9285
.. nonce: 2Jcf1f
.. section: Library

tracemalloc: Fix slicing traces and fix slicing a traceback.

..

.. bpo: 20354
.. date: 9284
.. nonce: kn2Ns9
.. section: Library

Fix an alignment issue in the tracemalloc module on 64-bit platforms. Bug
seen on 64-bit Linux when using "make profile-opt".

..

.. bpo: 17159
.. date: 9283
.. nonce: c2P911
.. section: Library

inspect.signature now accepts duck types of functions, which adds support
for Cython functions. Initial patch by Stefan Behnel.

..

.. bpo: 18801
.. date: 9282
.. nonce: Tm4jxb
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.classify_class_attrs to correctly classify object.__new__ and
object.__init__.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9281
.. nonce: 3eFjFu
.. section: Library

Fixed cmath.isinf's name in its argument parsing code.

..

.. bpo: 20311
.. date: 9280
.. nonce: f1lBLr
.. section: Library

poll and epoll now round the timeout away from zero, instead of rounding
towards zero, in select and selectors modules: select.epoll.poll(),
selectors.PollSelector.poll() and selectors.EpollSelector.poll(). For
example, a timeout of one microsecond (1e-6) is now rounded to one
millisecondi (1e-3), instead of being rounded to zero.  However, the
granularity property and asyncio's resolution feature were removed again.
(See also: bpo-20452)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9279
.. nonce: qcxztP
.. section: Library

asyncio: Some refactoring; various fixes; add write flow control to unix
pipes; Future.set_exception() instantiates the exception argument if it is a
class; improved proactor pipe transport; support wait_for(f, None); don't
log broken/disconnected pipes; use ValueError instead of assert for
forbidden subprocess_{shell,exec} arguments; added a convenience API for
subprocess management; added StreamReader.at_eof(); properly handle
duplicate coroutines/futures in gather(), wait(), as_completed(); use a
bytearray for buffering in StreamReader; and more.

..

.. bpo: 20288
.. date: 9278
.. nonce: 6zUZe3
.. section: Library

fix handling of invalid numeric charrefs in HTMLParser.

..

.. bpo: 20424
.. date: 9277
.. nonce: deh6LJ
.. section: Library

Python implementation of io.StringIO now supports lone surrogates.

..

.. bpo: 20308
.. date: 9276
.. nonce: lquugc
.. section: Library

inspect.signature now works on classes without user-defined __init__ or
__new__ methods.

..

.. bpo: 20372
.. date: 9275
.. nonce: Mn_S78
.. section: Library

inspect.getfile (and a bunch of other inspect functions that use it) doesn't
crash with unexpected AttributeError on classes defined in C without
__module__.

..

.. bpo: 20356
.. date: 9274
.. nonce: rD04St
.. section: Library

inspect.signature formatting uses '/' to separate positional-only parameters
from others.

..

.. bpo: 20223
.. date: 9273
.. nonce: y3icbD
.. section: Library

inspect.signature now supports methods defined with
functools.partialmethods.

..

.. bpo: 19456
.. date: 9272
.. nonce: 6HhsFx
.. section: Library

ntpath.join() now joins relative paths correctly when a drive is present.

..

.. bpo: 19077
.. date: 9271
.. nonce: xrOYHl
.. section: Library

tempfile.TemporaryDirectory cleanup no longer fails when called during
shutdown.  Emitting resource warning in __del__ no longer fails. Original
patch by Antoine Pitrou.

..

.. bpo: 20394
.. date: 9270
.. nonce: HzRZRc
.. section: Library

Silence Coverity warning in audioop module.

..

.. bpo: 20367
.. date: 9269
.. nonce: K0bFqf
.. section: Library

Fix behavior of concurrent.futures.as_completed() for duplicate arguments.
Patch by Glenn Langford.

..

.. bpo: 8260
.. date: 9268
.. nonce: nf7gg9
.. section: Library

The read(), readline() and readlines() methods of codecs.StreamReader
returned incomplete data when were called after readline() or read(size).
Based on patch by Amaury Forgeot d'Arc.

..

.. bpo: 20105
.. date: 9267
.. nonce: foel6V
.. section: Library

the codec exception chaining now correctly sets the traceback of the
original exception as its __traceback__ attribute.

..

.. bpo: 17481
.. date: 9266
.. nonce: RrGlJS
.. section: Library

inspect.getfullargspec() now uses inspect.signature() API.

..

.. bpo: 15304
.. date: 9265
.. nonce: GfZ2Sa
.. section: Library

concurrent.futures.wait() can block forever even if Futures have completed.
Patch by Glenn Langford.

..

.. bpo: 14455
.. date: 9264
.. nonce: bk3GTQ
.. section: Library

plistlib: fix serializing integers in the range of an unsigned long long but
outside of the range of signed long long for binary plist files.

..

.. bpo: 20406
.. date: 9263
.. nonce: AgBe_5
.. section: IDLE

Use Python application icons for Idle window title bars. Patch mostly by
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9262
.. nonce: FTwP_j
.. section: IDLE

Update the python.gif icon for the Idle classbrowser and pathbowser from the
old green snake to the new blue and yellow snakes.

..

.. bpo: 17721
.. date: 9261
.. nonce: 8Jh8C1
.. section: IDLE

Remove non-functional configuration dialog help button until we make it
actually gives some help when clicked. Patch by Guilherme Simões.

..

.. bpo: 20532
.. date: 9260
.. nonce: qsOt4d
.. section: Tests

Tests which use _testcapi now are marked as CPython only.

..

.. bpo: 19920
.. date: 9259
.. nonce: suOIC7
.. section: Tests

Added tests for TarFile.list().  Based on patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 19990
.. date: 9258
.. nonce: Lp1MVj
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the imghdr module.  Based on patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 20474
.. date: 9257
.. nonce: Jm7xrk
.. section: Tests

Fix test_socket "unexpected success" failures on OS X 10.7+.

..

.. bpo: 20530
.. date: 9256
.. nonce: dqn540
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic's signature format has been revised again. The new syntax is
highly human readable while still preventing false positives.  The syntax
also extends Python syntax to denote "self" and positional-only parameters,
allowing inspect.Signature objects to be totally accurate for all supported
builtins in Python 3.4.

..

.. bpo: 20456
.. date: 9255
.. nonce: RA_zxP
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now observes the C preprocessor conditional compilation
statements of the C files it parses.  When a Clinic block is inside a
conditional code, it adjusts its output to match, including automatically
generating an empty methoddef macro.

..

.. bpo: 20456
.. date: 9254
.. nonce: tYeVw1
.. section: Tools/Demos

Cloned functions in Argument Clinic now use the correct name, not the name
of the function they were cloned from, for text strings inside generated
code.

..

.. bpo: 20456
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: vG6PXO
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed Argument Clinic's test suite and "--converters" feature.

..

.. bpo: 20456
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: E-qgFP
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now allows specifying different names for a parameter in
Python and C, using "as" on the parameter line.

..

.. bpo: 20326
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: 1nRUAK
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now uses a simple, unique signature to annotate text
signatures in docstrings, resulting in fewer false positives.  "self"
parameters are also explicitly marked, allowing inspect.Signature() to
authoritatively detect (and skip) said parameters.

..

.. bpo: 20326
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: eVlPqt
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now generates separate checksums for the input and output
sections of the block, allowing external tools to verify that the input has
not changed (and thus the output is not out-of-date).

..

.. bpo: 20465
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: 6xLtE3
.. section: Build

Update SQLite shipped with OS X installer to 3.8.3.

..

.. bpo: 20517
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: PHWtoF
.. section: C API

Added new functions allowing OSError exceptions to reference two filenames
instead of one: PyErr_SetFromErrnoWithFilenameObjects() and
PyErr_SetExcFromWindowsErrWithFilenameObjects().

..

.. bpo: 20488
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: csO04J
.. section: Documentation

Change wording to say importlib is *the* implementation of import instead of
just *an* implementation.

..

.. bpo: 6386
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: TO2sFS
.. section: Documentation

Clarify in the tutorial that specifying a symlink to execute means the
directory containing the executed script and not the symlink is added to
sys.path.
