.. bpo: 19301
.. date: 7918
.. nonce: xZv71d
.. release date: 2013-10-20
.. section: Core and Builtins

Give classes and functions that are explicitly marked global a global
qualname.

..

.. bpo: 19279
.. date: 7917
.. nonce: VVzqJy
.. section: Core and Builtins

UTF-7 decoder no longer produces illegal strings.

..

.. bpo: 16612
.. date: 7916
.. nonce: 8bgX-E
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add "Argument Clinic", a compile-time preprocessor for C files to generate
argument parsing code.  (See PEP 436.)

..

.. bpo: 18810
.. date: 7915
.. nonce: tQAzk_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Shift stat calls in importlib.machinery.FileFinder such that the code is
optimistic that if something exists in a directory named exactly like the
possible package being searched for that it's in actuality a directory.

..

.. bpo: 18416
.. date: 7914
.. nonce: 5mWnIr
.. section: Core and Builtins

importlib.machinery.PathFinder now treats '' as the cwd and
importlib.machinery.FileFinder no longer special-cases '' to '.'. This leads
to modules imported from cwd to now possess an absolute file path for
__file__ (this does not affect modules specified by path on the CLI but it
does affect -m/runpy). It also allows FileFinder to be more consistent by
not having an edge case.

..

.. bpo: 4555
.. date: 7913
.. nonce: mOxiRO
.. section: Core and Builtins

All exported C symbols are now prefixed with either "Py" or "_Py".

..

.. bpo: 19219
.. date: 7912
.. nonce: _H8xTK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed up marshal.loads(), and make pyc files slightly (5% to 10%) smaller.

..

.. bpo: 19221
.. date: 7911
.. nonce: Y7d-d9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade Unicode database to version 6.3.0.

..

.. bpo: 16742
.. date: 7910
.. nonce: vmmba7
.. section: Core and Builtins

The result of the C callback PyOS_ReadlineFunctionPointer must now be a
string allocated by PyMem_RawMalloc() or PyMem_RawRealloc() (or NULL if an
error occurred), instead of a string allocated by PyMem_Malloc() or
PyMem_Realloc().

..

.. bpo: 19199
.. date: 7909
.. nonce: HZHjaz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove ``PyThreadState.tick_counter`` field

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7908
.. nonce: 5kIB0G
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix macro expansion of _PyErr_OCCURRED(), and make sure to use it in at
least one place so as to avoid regressions.

..

.. bpo: 19087
.. date: 7907
.. nonce: gdUdnV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve bytearray allocation in order to allow cheap popping of data at the
front (slice deletion).

..

.. bpo: 19014
.. date: 7906
.. nonce: y4w-XY
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview.cast() is now allowed on zero-length views.

..

.. bpo: 18690
.. date: 7905
.. nonce: CS9avj
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview is now automatically registered with collections.abc.Sequence

..

.. bpo: 19078
.. date: 7904
.. nonce: PQhOCk
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview now correctly supports the reversed builtin (Patch by Claudiu
Popa)

..

.. bpo: 17457
.. date: 7903
.. nonce: TeaU1w
.. section: Library

unittest test discovery now works with namespace packages. Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18235
.. date: 7902
.. nonce: LdBO1h
.. section: Library

Fix the sysconfig variables LDSHARED and BLDSHARED under AIX. Patch by David
Edelsohn.

..

.. bpo: 18606
.. date: 7901
.. nonce: CIapUf
.. section: Library

Add the new "statistics" module (PEP 450).  Contributed by Steven D'Aprano.

..

.. bpo: 12866
.. date: 7900
.. nonce: 7c7GGc
.. section: Library

The audioop module now supports 24-bit samples.

..

.. bpo: 19254
.. date: 7899
.. nonce: hq_ejm
.. section: Library

Provide an optimized Python implementation of pbkdf2_hmac.

..

.. bpo: 19201
.. date: 7898
.. nonce: OY6_PP
.. section: Library

Add "x" mode (exclusive creation) in opening file to bz2, gzip and lzma
modules. Patches by Tim Heaney and Vajrasky Kok. (See also: bpo-19222,
bpo-19223)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7897
.. nonce: dSKPsn
.. section: Library

Fix a reference count leak in _sre.

..

.. bpo: 19262
.. date: 7896
.. nonce: fNsTCq
.. section: Library

Initial check in of the 'asyncio' package (a.k.a. Tulip, a.k.a. PEP 3156).
There are no docs yet, and the PEP is slightly out of date with the code.
This module will have *provisional* status in Python 3.4.

..

.. bpo: 19276
.. date: 7895
.. nonce: Y69Qmv
.. section: Library

Fixed the wave module on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 19266
.. date: 7894
.. nonce: an8EiY
.. section: Library

Rename the new-in-3.4 ``contextlib.ignore`` context manager to
``contextlib.suppress`` in order to be more consistent with existing
descriptions of that operation elsewhere in the language and standard
library documentation (Patch by Zero Piraeus).

..

.. bpo: 18891
.. date: 7893
.. nonce: 4TroDn
.. section: Library

Completed the new email package (provisional) API additions by adding new
classes EmailMessage, MIMEPart, and ContentManager.

..

.. bpo: 18281
.. date: 7892
.. nonce: 1FnfEW
.. section: Library

Unused stat constants removed from `tarfile`.

..

.. bpo: 18999
.. date: 7891
.. nonce: -2OZju
.. section: Library

Multiprocessing now supports 'contexts' with the same API as the module, but
bound to specified start methods.

..

.. bpo: 18468
.. date: 7890
.. nonce: 8a1TVz
.. section: Library

The re.split, re.findall, and re.sub functions and the group() and groups()
methods of match object now always return a string or a bytes object.

..

.. bpo: 18725
.. date: 7889
.. nonce: zkMEqo
.. section: Library

The textwrap module now supports truncating multiline text.

..

.. bpo: 18776
.. date: 7888
.. nonce: Y-0SKr
.. section: Library

atexit callbacks now display their full traceback when they raise an
exception.

..

.. bpo: 17827
.. date: 7887
.. nonce: HJGFDL
.. section: Library

Add the missing documentation for ``codecs.encode`` and ``codecs.decode``.

..

.. bpo: 19218
.. date: 7886
.. nonce: Cd2omk
.. section: Library

Rename collections.abc to _collections_abc in order to speed up interpreter
start.

..

.. bpo: 18582
.. date: 7885
.. nonce: hn0YhD
.. section: Library

Add 'pbkdf2_hmac' to the hashlib module. It implements PKCS#5 password-based
key derivation functions with HMAC as pseudorandom function.

..

.. bpo: 19131
.. date: 7884
.. nonce: eZXzpr
.. section: Library

The aifc module now correctly reads and writes sampwidth of compressed
streams.

..

.. bpo: 19209
.. date: 7883
.. nonce: 3Hyd--
.. section: Library

Remove import of copyreg from the os module to speed up interpreter startup.
stat_result and statvfs_result are now hard-coded to reside in the os
module.

..

.. bpo: 19205
.. date: 7882
.. nonce: yrFzJn
.. section: Library

Don't import the 're' module in site and sysconfig module to speed up
interpreter start.

..

.. bpo: 9548
.. date: 7881
.. nonce: nhTqHw
.. section: Library

Add a minimal "_bootlocale" module that is imported by the _io module
instead of the full locale module.

..

.. bpo: 18764
.. date: 7880
.. nonce: rbnhLA
.. section: Library

Remove the 'print' alias for the PDB 'p' command so that it no longer
shadows the print function.

..

.. bpo: 19158
.. date: 7879
.. nonce: GvkZuU
.. section: Library

A rare race in BoundedSemaphore could allow .release() too often.

..

.. bpo: 15805
.. date: 7878
.. nonce: F_Ubx0
.. section: Library

Add contextlib.redirect_stdout().

..

.. bpo: 18716
.. date: 7877
.. nonce: L9QcWX
.. section: Library

Deprecate the formatter module.

..

.. bpo: 10712
.. date: 7876
.. nonce: rnd0oc
.. section: Library

2to3 has a new "asserts" fixer that replaces deprecated names of unittest
methods (e.g. failUnlessEqual -> assertEqual).

..

.. bpo: 18037
.. date: 7875
.. nonce: 7XGs8m
.. section: Library

2to3 now escapes ``'\u'`` and ``'\U'`` in native strings.

..

.. bpo: 17839
.. date: 7874
.. nonce: EyWhFu
.. section: Library

base64.decodebytes and base64.encodebytes now accept any object that exports
a 1 dimensional array of bytes (this means the same is now also true for
base64_codec)

..

.. bpo: 19132
.. date: 7873
.. nonce: ADBW6c
.. section: Library

The pprint module now supports compact mode.

..

.. bpo: 19137
.. date: 7872
.. nonce: Iuit_M
.. section: Library

The pprint module now correctly formats instances of set and frozenset
subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 10042
.. date: 7871
.. nonce: AH33zP
.. section: Library

functools.total_ordering now correctly handles NotImplemented being returned
by the underlying comparison function (Patch by Katie Miller)

..

.. bpo: 19092
.. date: 7870
.. nonce: Z7dea9
.. section: Library

contextlib.ExitStack now correctly reraises exceptions from the __exit__
callbacks of inner context managers (Patch by Hrvoje Nikšić)

..

.. bpo: 12641
.. date: 7869
.. nonce: r9sIyX
.. section: Library

Avoid passing "-mno-cygwin" to the mingw32 compiler, except when necessary.
Patch by Oscar Benjamin.

..

.. bpo: 5845
.. date: 7868
.. nonce: obzVIH
.. section: Library

In site.py, only load readline history from ~/.python_history if no history
has been read already.  This avoids double writes to the history file at
shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7867
.. nonce: 08TsG5
.. section: Library

Properly initialize all fields of a SSL object after allocation.

..

.. bpo: 19095
.. date: 7866
.. nonce: qZGvAs
.. section: Library

SSLSocket.getpeercert() now raises ValueError when the SSL handshake hasn't
been done.

..

.. bpo: 4366
.. date: 7865
.. nonce: lDEdfK
.. section: Library

Fix building extensions on all platforms when --enable-shared is used.

..

.. bpo: 19030
.. date: 7864
.. nonce: uKvvJF
.. section: Library

Fixed `inspect.getmembers` and `inspect.classify_class_attrs` to attempt
activating descriptors before falling back to a __dict__ search for faulty
descriptors.  `inspect.classify_class_attrs` no longer returns Attributes
whose home class is None.

..

.. bpo: 1772673
.. date: 7863
.. nonce: 5cdzx1
.. section: C API

The type of `char*` arguments now changed to `const char*`.

..

.. bpo: 16129
.. date: 7862
.. nonce: 8zyucl
.. section: C API

Added a `Py_SetStandardStreamEncoding` pre-initialization API to allow
embedding applications like Blender to force a particular encoding and error
handler for the standard IO streams (initial patch by Bastien Montagne)

..

.. bpo: 19275
.. date: 7861
.. nonce: uboiiw
.. section: Tests

Fix test_site on AMD64 Snow Leopard

..

.. bpo: 14407
.. date: 7860
.. nonce: -tmRl9
.. section: Tests

Fix unittest test discovery in test_concurrent_futures.

..

.. bpo: 18919
.. date: 7859
.. nonce: cEkIuG
.. section: Tests

Unified and extended tests for audio modules: aifc, sunau and wave.

..

.. bpo: 18714
.. date: 7858
.. nonce: tcsRe-
.. section: Tests

Added tests for ``pdb.find_function()``.

..

.. bpo: 18758
.. date: 7857
.. nonce: hMCi7Z
.. section: Documentation

Fixed and improved cross-references.

..

.. bpo: 18972
.. date: 7856
.. nonce: iFwRVt
.. section: Documentation

Modernize email examples and use the argparse module in them.

..

.. bpo: 19130
.. date: 7855
.. nonce: 7l54jz
.. section: Build

Correct PCbuild/readme.txt, Python 3.3 and 3.4 require VS 2010.

..

.. bpo: 15663
.. date: 7854
.. nonce: 72Jlq0
.. section: Build

Update OS X 10.6+ installer to use Tcl/Tk 8.5.15.

..

.. bpo: 14499
.. date: 7853
.. nonce: 5ipy19
.. section: Build

Fix several problems with OS X universal build support:   1. ppc arch
detection for extension module builds broke with Xcode 5   2. ppc arch
detection in configure did not work on OS X 10.4   3. -sysroot and -arch
flags were unnecessarily duplicated   4. there was no obvious way to
configure an intel-32 only build.

..

.. bpo: 19019
.. date: 7852
.. nonce: 5W7lw_
.. section: Build

Change the OS X installer build script to use CFLAGS instead of OPT for
special build options.  By setting OPT, some compiler-specific options like
-fwrapv were overridden and thus not used, which could result in broken
interpreters when building with clang.
