.. bpo: 28648
.. date: 9994
.. nonce: z7B52W
.. release date: 2017-01-02
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash in Py_DecodeLocale() in debug build on Mac OS X when decode
astral characters.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 28426
.. date: 9993
.. nonce: E_quyK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed potential crash in PyUnicode_AsDecodedObject() in debug build.

..

.. bpo: 28563
.. date: 9992
.. nonce: iweEiw
.. section: Library

Fixed possible DoS and arbitrary code execution when handle plural form
selections in the gettext module.  The expression parser now supports exact
syntax supported by GNU gettext.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9991
.. nonce: Ny9oPv
.. section: Library

In the curses module, raise an error if window.getstr() or window.instr() is
passed a negative value.

..

.. bpo: 27783
.. date: 9990
.. nonce: 6fCCY9
.. section: Library

Fix possible usage of uninitialized memory in operator.methodcaller.

..

.. bpo: 27774
.. date: 9989
.. nonce: FDcik1
.. section: Library

Fix possible Py_DECREF on unowned object in _sre.

..

.. bpo: 27760
.. date: 9988
.. nonce: gxMjp4
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in binascii.b2a_qp.

..

.. bpo: 27758
.. date: 9987
.. nonce: x9DC4R
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in the _csv module for large record lengths.

..

.. bpo: 27568
.. date: 9986
.. nonce: OnuO9s
.. section: Library

Prevent HTTPoxy attack (CVE-2016-1000110). Ignore the HTTP_PROXY variable
when REQUEST_METHOD environment is set, which indicates that the script is
in CGI mode.

..

.. bpo: 27759
.. date: 9985
.. nonce: qpMDGq
.. section: Library

Fix selectors incorrectly retain invalid file descriptors. Patch by Mark
Williams.

..

.. bpo: 28248
.. date: 9984
.. nonce: RYLa4f
.. section: Build

Update Windows build to use OpenSSL 1.0.2j.

..

.. bpo: 27369
.. date: 9983
.. nonce: LG7U2D
.. section: Tests

In test_pyexpat, avoid testing an error message detail that changed in Expat
2.2.0.
