.. bpo: 37461
.. date: 2019-07-16-08-11-00
.. nonce: 1Ahz7O
.. release date: 2019-09-09
.. section: Security

Fix an infinite loop when parsing specially crafted email headers. Patch by
Abhilash Raj.

..

.. bpo: 35907
.. date: 2019-05-21-23-20-18
.. nonce: NC_zNK
.. section: Security

CVE-2019-9948: Avoid file reading by disallowing ``local-file://`` and
``local_file://`` URL schemes in ``URLopener().open()`` and
``URLopener().retrieve()`` of :mod:`urllib.request`.

..

.. bpo: 34155
.. date: 2019-05-04-13-33-37
.. nonce: MJll68
.. section: Security

Fix parsing of invalid email addresses with more than one ``@`` (e.g.
a@b@c.com.) to not return the part before 2nd ``@`` as valid email address.
Patch by maxking & jpic.

..

.. bpo: 36742
.. date: 2019-04-29-15-34-59
.. nonce: QCUY0i
.. section: Security

Fixes mishandling of pre-normalization characters in urlsplit().

..

.. bpo: 30458
.. date: 2019-04-10-08-53-30
.. nonce: 51E-DA
.. section: Security

Address CVE-2019-9740 by disallowing URL paths with embedded whitespace or
control characters through into the underlying http client request.  Such
potentially malicious header injection URLs now cause an
http.client.InvalidURL exception to be raised.

..

.. bpo: 36816
.. date: 2019-05-08-15-55-46
.. nonce: WBKRGZ
.. section: Tests

Update Lib/test/selfsigned_pythontestdotnet.pem to match
self-signed.pythontest.net's new TLS certificate.

..

.. bpo: 36576
.. date: 2019-04-05-10-34-29
.. nonce: 7Cp2kK
.. section: Tests

Skip test_ssl and test_asyncio tests failing with OpenSSL 1.1.1.

..

.. bpo: 36478
.. date: 2019-03-29-14-29-06
.. nonce: hzyneF
.. section: Build

Fix compatibility with ISO C89 needed by "gnu89" standard of GCC 4.8: use
C89 for loops in backported pickle patch. Patch by Anthony Sottile.
