.. bpo: 22980
.. date: 9109
.. nonce: Lu_y6y
.. release date: 2015-04-19
.. section: Core and Builtins

Under Linux, GNU/KFreeBSD and the Hurd, C extensions now include the
architecture triplet in the extension name, to make it easy to test builds
for different ABIs in the same working tree.  Under OS X, the extension name
now includes PEP 3149-style information.

..

.. bpo: 22631
.. date: 9108
.. nonce: nTx_ZF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added Linux-specific socket constant CAN_RAW_FD_FRAMES. Patch courtesy of
Joe Jevnik.

..

.. bpo: 23731
.. date: 9107
.. nonce: FOXb37
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 488: removal of .pyo files.

..

.. bpo: 23726
.. date: 9106
.. nonce: ZopTQ0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't enable GC for user subclasses of non-GC types that don't add any new
fields.  Patch by Eugene Toder.

..

.. bpo: 23309
.. date: 9105
.. nonce: Wfnsnz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid a deadlock at shutdown if a daemon thread is aborted while it is
holding a lock to a buffered I/O object, and the main thread tries to use
the same I/O object (typically stdout or stderr).  A fatal error is emitted
instead.

..

.. bpo: 22977
.. date: 9104
.. nonce: hutEse
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed formatting Windows error messages on Wine. Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23466
.. date: 9103
.. nonce: KhMltK
.. section: Core and Builtins

%c, %o, %x, and %X in bytes formatting now raise TypeError on non-integer
input.

..

.. bpo: 24044
.. date: 9102
.. nonce: H7vb6-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible null pointer dereference in list.sort in out of memory
conditions.

..

.. bpo: 21354
.. date: 9101
.. nonce: ZZTe1E
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyCFunction_New function is exposed by python DLL again.

..

.. bpo: 23840
.. date: 9100
.. nonce: mtSbqO
.. section: Library

tokenize.open() now closes the temporary binary file on error to fix a
resource warning.

..

.. bpo: 16914
.. date: 9099
.. nonce: GrP2Jr
.. section: Library

new debuglevel 2 in smtplib adds timestamps to debug output.

..

.. bpo: 7159
.. date: 9098
.. nonce: KCgOUm
.. section: Library

urllib.request now supports sending auth credentials automatically after the
first 401.  This enhancement is a superset of the enhancement from issue
#19494 and supersedes that change.

..

.. bpo: 23703
.. date: 9097
.. nonce: kYybxm
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in urljoin() introduced in 901e4e52b20a. Patch by Demian
Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 4254
.. date: 9096
.. nonce: eUC_2H
.. section: Library

Adds _curses.update_lines_cols().  Patch by Arnon Yaari

..

.. bpo: 19933
.. date: 9095
.. nonce: Qq8utk
.. section: Library

Provide default argument for ndigits in round. Patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 23193
.. date: 9094
.. nonce: n5ahcG
.. section: Library

Add a numeric_owner parameter to tarfile.TarFile.extract and
tarfile.TarFile.extractall. Patch by Michael Vogt and Eric Smith.

..

.. bpo: 23342
.. date: 9093
.. nonce: CbSzYI
.. section: Library

Add a subprocess.run() function than returns a CalledProcess instance for a
more consistent API than the existing call* functions.

..

.. bpo: 21217
.. date: 9092
.. nonce: TkFTlk
.. section: Library

inspect.getsourcelines() now tries to compute the start and end lines from
the code object, fixing an issue when a lambda function is used as decorator
argument. Patch by Thomas Ballinger and Allison Kaptur.

..

.. bpo: 24521
.. date: 9091
.. nonce: bn4U-y
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflows in the pickle module.

..

.. bpo: 22931
.. date: 9090
.. nonce: 4CuWYD
.. section: Library

Allow '[' and ']' in cookie values.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9089
.. nonce: fgX8Qe
.. section: Library

The keywords attribute of functools.partial is now always a dictionary.

..

.. bpo: 23811
.. date: 9088
.. nonce: B6tzf9
.. section: Library

Add missing newline to the PyCompileError error message. Patch by Alex
Shkop.

..

.. bpo: 21116
.. date: 9087
.. nonce: Orft3K
.. section: Library

Avoid blowing memory when allocating a multiprocessing shared array that's
larger than 50% of the available RAM.  Patch by Médéric Boquien.

..

.. bpo: 22982
.. date: 9086
.. nonce: xYmG62
.. section: Library

Improve BOM handling when seeking to multiple positions of a writable text
file.

..

.. bpo: 23464
.. date: 9085
.. nonce: _XGkBk
.. section: Library

Removed deprecated asyncio JoinableQueue.

..

.. bpo: 23529
.. date: 9084
.. nonce: Hr7AHH
.. section: Library

Limit the size of decompressed data when reading from GzipFile, BZ2File or
LZMAFile.  This defeats denial of service attacks using compressed bombs
(i.e. compressed payloads which decompress to a huge size).  Patch by Martin
Panter and Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 21859
.. date: 9083
.. nonce: GYrUNP
.. section: Library

Added Python implementation of io.FileIO.

..

.. bpo: 23865
.. date: 9082
.. nonce: PtSLgU
.. section: Library

close() methods in multiple modules now are idempotent and more robust at
shutdown. If they need to release multiple resources, all are released even
if errors occur.

..

.. bpo: 23400
.. date: 9081
.. nonce: JSh9Z3
.. section: Library

Raise same exception on both Python 2 and 3 if sem_open is not available.
Patch by Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 10838
.. date: 9080
.. nonce: p9tSPC
.. section: Library

The subprocess now module includes SubprocessError and TimeoutError in its
list of exported names for the users wild enough to use ``from subprocess
import *``.

..

.. bpo: 23411
.. date: 9079
.. nonce: 0im3Qw
.. section: Library

Added DefragResult, ParseResult, SplitResult, DefragResultBytes,
ParseResultBytes, and SplitResultBytes to urllib.parse.__all__. Patch by
Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23881
.. date: 9078
.. nonce: yZjl4b
.. section: Library

urllib.request.ftpwrapper constructor now closes the socket if the FTP
connection failed to fix a ResourceWarning.

..

.. bpo: 23853
.. date: 9077
.. nonce: mNY1eI
.. section: Library

:meth:`socket.socket.sendall` does no more reset the socket timeout each
time data is sent successfully. The socket timeout is now the maximum total
duration to send all data.

..

.. bpo: 22721
.. date: 9076
.. nonce: MVfBL9
.. section: Library

An order of multiline pprint output of set or dict containing orderable and
non-orderable elements no longer depends on iteration order of set or dict.

..

.. bpo: 15133
.. date: 9075
.. nonce: C0QfV8
.. section: Library

_tkinter.tkapp.getboolean() now supports Tcl_Obj and always returns bool.
tkinter.BooleanVar now validates input values (accepted bool, int, str, and
Tcl_Obj).  tkinter.BooleanVar.get() now always returns bool.

..

.. bpo: 10590
.. date: 9074
.. nonce: nkxXfU
.. section: Library

xml.sax.parseString() now supports string argument.

..

.. bpo: 23338
.. date: 9073
.. nonce: ZYMGN1
.. section: Library

Fixed formatting ctypes error messages on Cygwin. Patch by Makoto Kato.

..

.. bpo: 15582
.. date: 9072
.. nonce: 26wJNk
.. section: Library

inspect.getdoc() now follows inheritance chains.

..

.. bpo: 2175
.. date: 9071
.. nonce: cHiVOp
.. section: Library

SAX parsers now support a character stream of InputSource object.

..

.. bpo: 16840
.. date: 9070
.. nonce: kKIhPm
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports 64-bit integers added in Tcl 8.4 and arbitrary
precision integers added in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23834
.. date: 9069
.. nonce: fX3TF4
.. section: Library

Fix socket.sendto(), use the C Py_ssize_t type to store the result of
sendto() instead of the C int type.

..

.. bpo: 23618
.. date: 9068
.. nonce: Of_q5t
.. section: Library

:meth:`socket.socket.connect` now waits until the connection completes
instead of raising :exc:`InterruptedError` if the connection is interrupted
by signals, signal handlers don't raise an exception and the socket is
blocking or has a timeout. :meth:`socket.socket.connect` still raise
:exc:`InterruptedError` for non-blocking sockets.

..

.. bpo: 21526
.. date: 9067
.. nonce: QQEXrR
.. section: Library

Tkinter now supports new boolean type in Tcl 8.5.

..

.. bpo: 23836
.. date: 9066
.. nonce: zrEmlR
.. section: Library

Fix the faulthandler module to handle reentrant calls to its signal
handlers.

..

.. bpo: 23838
.. date: 9065
.. nonce: IX6FPX
.. section: Library

linecache now clears the cache and returns an empty result on MemoryError.

..

.. bpo: 10395
.. date: 9064
.. nonce: fi_lZp
.. section: Library

Added os.path.commonpath(). Implemented in posixpath and ntpath. Based on
patch by Rafik Draoui.

..

.. bpo: 23611
.. date: 9063
.. nonce: QkBJVB
.. section: Library

Serializing more "lookupable" objects (such as unbound methods or nested
classes) now are supported with pickle protocols < 4.

..

.. bpo: 13583
.. date: 9062
.. nonce: -MPBjZ
.. section: Library

sqlite3.Row now supports slice indexing.

..

.. bpo: 18473
.. date: 9061
.. nonce: 89RHm-
.. section: Library

Fixed 2to3 and 3to2 compatible pickle mappings.  Fixed ambigious reverse
mappings.  Added many new mappings.  Import mapping is no longer applied to
modules already mapped with full name mapping.

..

.. bpo: 23485
.. date: 9060
.. nonce: kQWN6L
.. section: Library

select.select() is now retried automatically with the recomputed timeout
when interrupted by a signal, except if the signal handler raises an
exception. This change is part of the PEP 475.

..

.. bpo: 23752
.. date: 9059
.. nonce: 5fbVNb
.. section: Library

When built from an existing file descriptor, io.FileIO() now only calls
fstat() once. Before fstat() was called twice, which was not necessary.

..

.. bpo: 23704
.. date: 9058
.. nonce: Ggjvm8
.. section: Library

collections.deque() objects now support __add__, __mul__, and __imul__().

..

.. bpo: 23171
.. date: 9057
.. nonce: b6PBzM
.. section: Library

csv.Writer.writerow() now supports arbitrary iterables.

..

.. bpo: 23745
.. date: 9056
.. nonce: E00Bml
.. section: Library

The new email header parser now handles duplicate MIME parameter names
without error, similar to how get_param behaves.

..

.. bpo: 22117
.. date: 9055
.. nonce: bTO0xx
.. section: Library

Fix os.utime(), it now rounds the timestamp towards minus infinity (-inf)
instead of rounding towards zero.

..

.. bpo: 23310
.. date: 9054
.. nonce: GXmFMR
.. section: Library

Fix MagicMock's initializer to work with __methods__, just like
configure_mock().  Patch by Kasia Jachim.

..

.. bpo: 23817
.. date: 9053
.. nonce: DTmVan
.. section: Build

FreeBSD now uses "1.0" in the SOVERSION as other operating systems, instead
of just "1".

..

.. bpo: 23501
.. date: 9052
.. nonce: iz10e6
.. section: Build

Argument Clinic now generates code into separate files by default.

..

.. bpo: 23799
.. date: 9051
.. nonce: XU2xDw
.. section: Tests

Added test.support.start_threads() for running and cleaning up multiple
threads.

..

.. bpo: 22390
.. date: 9050
.. nonce: UPVFnq
.. section: Tests

test.regrtest now emits a warning if temporary files or directories are left
after running a test.

..

.. bpo: 18128
.. date: 9049
.. nonce: lx2V5a
.. section: Tools/Demos

pygettext now uses standard +NNNN format in the POT-Creation-Date header.

..

.. bpo: 23935
.. date: 9048
.. nonce: JSYowT
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic's understanding of format units accepting bytes, bytearrays,
and buffers is now consistent with both the documentation and the
implementation.

..

.. bpo: 23944
.. date: 9047
.. nonce: Q8ZL2s
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now wraps long impl prototypes at column 78.

..

.. bpo: 20586
.. date: 9046
.. nonce: 7BiEkx
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now ensures that functions without docstrings have
signatures.

..

.. bpo: 23492
.. date: 9045
.. nonce: kjIcQW
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now generates argument parsing code with PyArg_Parse instead
of PyArg_ParseTuple if possible.

..

.. bpo: 23500
.. date: 9044
.. nonce: H6_dX_
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic is now smarter about generating the "#ifndef" (empty)
definition of the methoddef macro: it's only generated once, even if
Argument Clinic processes the same symbol multiple times, and it's emitted
at the end of all processing rather than immediately after the first use.

..

.. bpo: 23998
.. date: 9043
.. nonce: z7mlLW
.. section: C API

PyImport_ReInitLock() now checks for lock allocation error
