.. bpo: 23573
.. date: 9042
.. nonce: ZpM4D-
.. release date: 2015-03-28
.. section: Core and Builtins

Increased performance of string search operations (str.find, str.index,
str.count, the in operator, str.split, str.partition) with arguments of
different kinds (UCS1, UCS2, UCS4).

..

.. bpo: 23753
.. date: 9041
.. nonce: CREjLC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python doesn't support anymore platforms without stat() or fstat(), these
functions are always required.

..

.. bpo: 23681
.. date: 9040
.. nonce: kh02TF
.. section: Core and Builtins

The -b option now affects comparisons of bytes with int.

..

.. bpo: 23632
.. date: 9039
.. nonce: UVdIZY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Memoryviews now allow tuple indexing (including for multi-dimensional
memoryviews).

..

.. bpo: 23192
.. date: 9038
.. nonce: QKqdow
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed generator lambdas.  Patch by Bruno Cauet.

..

.. bpo: 23629
.. date: 9037
.. nonce: r9Mt2C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the default __sizeof__ implementation for variable-sized objects.

..

.. bpo: 14260
.. date: 9036
.. nonce: b5M04V
.. section: Library

The groupindex attribute of regular expression pattern object now is non-
modifiable mapping.

..

.. bpo: 23792
.. date: 9035
.. nonce: Kfm9-f
.. section: Library

Ignore KeyboardInterrupt when the pydoc pager is active. This mimics the
behavior of the standard unix pagers, and prevents pipepager from shutting
down while the pager itself is still running.

..

.. bpo: 23775
.. date: 9034
.. nonce: xKGrSQ
.. section: Library

pprint() of OrderedDict now outputs the same representation as repr().

..

.. bpo: 23765
.. date: 9033
.. nonce: 2ta_C4
.. section: Library

Removed IsBadStringPtr calls in ctypes

..

.. bpo: 22364
.. date: 9032
.. nonce: ejtoKl
.. section: Library

Improved some re error messages using regex for hints.

..

.. bpo: 23742
.. date: 9031
.. nonce: _EkAIa
.. section: Library

ntpath.expandvars() no longer loses unbalanced single quotes.

..

.. bpo: 21717
.. date: 9030
.. nonce: pKndpx
.. section: Library

The zipfile.ZipFile.open function now supports 'x' (exclusive creation)
mode.

..

.. bpo: 21802
.. date: 9029
.. nonce: ygSM2A
.. section: Library

The reader in BufferedRWPair now is closed even when closing writer failed
in BufferedRWPair.close().

..

.. bpo: 23622
.. date: 9028
.. nonce: 9-ZRqj
.. section: Library

Unknown escapes in regular expressions that consist of ``'\'`` and ASCII
letter now raise a deprecation warning and will be forbidden in Python 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 23671
.. date: 9027
.. nonce: zWPm-a
.. section: Library

string.Template now allows specifying the "self" parameter as a keyword
argument.  string.Formatter now allows specifying the "self" and the
"format_string" parameters as keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 23502
.. date: 9026
.. nonce: AH20IQ
.. section: Library

The pprint module now supports mapping proxies.

..

.. bpo: 17530
.. date: 9025
.. nonce: PUp8rL
.. section: Library

pprint now wraps long bytes objects and bytearrays.

..

.. bpo: 22687
.. date: 9024
.. nonce: zEJPd9
.. section: Library

Fixed some corner cases in breaking words in tetxtwrap. Got rid of quadratic
complexity in breaking long words.

..

.. bpo: 4727
.. date: 9023
.. nonce: iDQSpi
.. section: Library

The copy module now uses pickle protocol 4 (PEP 3154) and supports copying
of instances of classes whose __new__ method takes keyword-only arguments.

..

.. bpo: 23491
.. date: 9022
.. nonce: P_WKrt
.. section: Library

Added a zipapp module to support creating executable zip file archives of
Python code. Registered ".pyz" and ".pyzw" extensions on Windows for these
archives (PEP 441).

..

.. bpo: 23657
.. date: 9021
.. nonce: y1OaV-
.. section: Library

Avoid explicit checks for str in zipapp, adding support for pathlib.Path
objects as arguments.

..

.. bpo: 23688
.. date: 9020
.. nonce: d6LVy3
.. section: Library

Added support of arbitrary bytes-like objects and avoided unnecessary
copying of memoryview in gzip.GzipFile.write(). Original patch by Wolfgang
Maier.

..

.. bpo: 23252
.. date: 9019
.. nonce: Goi18g
.. section: Library

Added support for writing ZIP files to unseekable streams.

..

.. bpo: 23647
.. date: 9018
.. nonce: pX2qrx
.. section: Library

Increase imaplib's MAXLINE to accommodate modern mailbox sizes.

..

.. bpo: 23539
.. date: 9017
.. nonce: 5BVUim
.. section: Library

If body is None, http.client.HTTPConnection.request now sets Content-Length
to 0 for PUT, POST, and PATCH headers to avoid 411 errors from some web
servers.

..

.. bpo: 22351
.. date: 9016
.. nonce: agB8Y3
.. section: Library

The nntplib.NNTP constructor no longer leaves the connection and socket open
until the garbage collector cleans them up.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23704
.. date: 9015
.. nonce: LTyyxL
.. section: Library

collections.deque() objects now support methods for index(), insert(), and
copy().  This allows deques to be registered as a MutableSequence and it
improves their substitutability for lists.

..

.. bpo: 23715
.. date: 9014
.. nonce: Yap3tU
.. section: Library

:func:`signal.sigwaitinfo` and :func:`signal.sigtimedwait` are now retried
when interrupted by a signal not in the *sigset* parameter, if the signal
handler does not raise an exception. signal.sigtimedwait() recomputes the
timeout with a monotonic clock when it is retried.

..

.. bpo: 23001
.. date: 9013
.. nonce: YSFnam
.. section: Library

Few functions in modules mmap, ossaudiodev, socket, ssl, and codecs, that
accepted only read-only bytes-like object now accept writable bytes-like
object too.

..

.. bpo: 23646
.. date: 9012
.. nonce: Tljc1S
.. section: Library

If time.sleep() is interrupted by a signal, the sleep is now retried with
the recomputed delay, except if the signal handler raises an exception (PEP
475).

..

.. bpo: 23136
.. date: 9011
.. nonce: 1bnpnb
.. section: Library

_strptime now uniformly handles all days in week 0, including Dec 30 of
previous year.  Based on patch by Jim Carroll.

..

.. bpo: 23700
.. date: 9010
.. nonce: VfnWwi
.. section: Library

Iterator of NamedTemporaryFile now keeps a reference to NamedTemporaryFile
instance.  Patch by Bohuslav Kabrda.

..

.. bpo: 22903
.. date: 9009
.. nonce: 2GjTHY
.. section: Library

The fake test case created by unittest.loader when it fails importing a test
module is now picklable.

..

.. bpo: 22181
.. date: 9008
.. nonce: 7mnxea
.. section: Library

On Linux, os.urandom() now uses the new getrandom() syscall if available,
syscall introduced in the Linux kernel 3.17. It is more reliable and more
secure, because it avoids the need of a file descriptor and waits until the
kernel has enough entropy.

..

.. bpo: 2211
.. date: 9007
.. nonce: 17Iz5U
.. section: Library

Updated the implementation of the http.cookies.Morsel class. Setting
attributes key, value and coded_value directly now is deprecated. update()
and setdefault() now transform and check keys.  Comparing for equality now
takes into account attributes key, value and coded_value. copy() now returns
a Morsel, not a dict.  repr() now contains all attributes. Optimized
checking keys and quoting values.  Added new tests. Original patch by Demian
Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 18983
.. date: 9006
.. nonce: vF4i2S
.. section: Library

Allow selection of output units in timeit. Patch by Julian Gindi.

..

.. bpo: 23631
.. date: 9005
.. nonce: GfSqNI
.. section: Library

Fix traceback.format_list when a traceback has been mutated.

..

.. bpo: 23568
.. date: 9004
.. nonce: ffzJc7
.. section: Library

Add rdivmod support to MagicMock() objects. Patch by Håkan Lövdahl.

..

.. bpo: 2052
.. date: 9003
.. nonce: ujNgna
.. section: Library

Add charset parameter to HtmlDiff.make_file().

..

.. bpo: 23668
.. date: 9002
.. nonce: nF_jnN
.. section: Library

Support os.truncate and os.ftruncate on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 23138
.. date: 9001
.. nonce: 4vMoMZ
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing cookies with absent keys or values in cookiejar. Patch by
Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23051
.. date: 9000
.. nonce: Vi5tCZ
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.Pool methods imap() and imap_unordered() now handle
exceptions raised by an iterator.  Patch by Alon Diamant and Davin Potts.

..

.. bpo: 23581
.. date: 8999
.. nonce: D4Lknl
.. section: Library

Add matmul support to MagicMock. Patch by Håkan Lövdahl.

..

.. bpo: 23566
.. date: 8998
.. nonce: F6LSyk
.. section: Library

enable(), register(), dump_traceback() and dump_traceback_later() functions
of faulthandler now accept file descriptors. Patch by Wei Wu.

..

.. bpo: 22928
.. date: 8997
.. nonce: q2TmY0
.. section: Library

Disabled HTTP header injections in http.client. Original patch by Demian
Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23615
.. date: 8996
.. nonce: 5Kx9k5
.. section: Library

Modules bz2, tarfile and tokenize now can be reloaded with imp.reload().
Patch by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 23605
.. date: 8995
.. nonce: JUOA_X
.. section: Library

os.walk() now calls os.scandir() instead of os.listdir(). The usage of
os.scandir() reduces the number of calls to os.stat(). Initial patch written
by Ben Hoyt.

..

.. bpo: 23585
.. date: 8994
.. nonce: DTIIoI
.. section: Build

make patchcheck will ensure the interpreter is built.

..

.. bpo: 23583
.. date: 8993
.. nonce: bY8AbM
.. section: Tests

Added tests for standard IO streams in IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 22289
.. date: 8992
.. nonce: ybGcC-
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_urllib2net failures due to ftp connection timeout.

..

.. bpo: 22826
.. date: 8991
.. nonce: 3bcoDL
.. section: Tools/Demos

The result of open() in Tools/freeze/bkfile.py is now better compatible with
regular files (in particular it now supports the context management
protocol).
