.. bpo: 23285
.. date: 8948
.. nonce: bJJA8B
.. release date: 2015-02-08
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 475 - EINTR handling.

..

.. bpo: 22735
.. date: 8947
.. nonce: mFEX9n
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix many edge cases (including crashes) involving custom mro()
implementations.

..

.. bpo: 22896
.. date: 8946
.. nonce: xSDAHK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid using PyObject_AsCharBuffer(), PyObject_AsReadBuffer() and
PyObject_AsWriteBuffer().

..

.. bpo: 21295
.. date: 8945
.. nonce: LYq9nF
.. section: Core and Builtins

Revert some changes (issue #16795) to AST line numbers and column offsets
that constituted a regression.

..

.. bpo: 22986
.. date: 8944
.. nonce: yay2Lv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow changing an object's __class__ between a dynamic type and static type
in some cases.

..

.. bpo: 15859
.. date: 8943
.. nonce: Fs5mE2
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyUnicode_EncodeFSDefault(), PyUnicode_EncodeMBCS() and
PyUnicode_EncodeCodePage() now raise an exception if the object is not a
Unicode object. For PyUnicode_EncodeFSDefault(), it was already the case on
platforms other than Windows. Patch written by Campbell Barton.

..

.. bpo: 21408
.. date: 8942
.. nonce: Lz6P3P
.. section: Core and Builtins

The default __ne__() now returns NotImplemented if __eq__() returned
NotImplemented.  Original patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23321
.. date: 8941
.. nonce: HQelge
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in str.decode() when error handler returned replacement string
longer than malformed input data.

..

.. bpo: 22286
.. date: 8940
.. nonce: l6Qyy1
.. section: Core and Builtins

The "backslashreplace" error handlers now works with decoding and
translating.

..

.. bpo: 23253
.. date: 8939
.. nonce: p4B1H-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Delay-load ShellExecute[AW] in os.startfile for reduced startup overhead on
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 22038
.. date: 8938
.. nonce: BMZUHx
.. section: Core and Builtins

pyatomic.h now uses stdatomic.h or GCC built-in functions for atomic memory
access if available. Patch written by Vitor de Lima and Gustavo Temple.

..

.. bpo: 20284
.. date: 8937
.. nonce: CH8wpD
.. section: Core and Builtins

%-interpolation (aka printf) formatting added for bytes and bytearray.

..

.. bpo: 23048
.. date: 8936
.. nonce: X5BUd3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix jumping out of an infinite while loop in the pdb.

..

.. bpo: 20335
.. date: 8935
.. nonce: YcAPOs
.. section: Core and Builtins

bytes constructor now raises TypeError when encoding or errors is specified
with non-string argument.  Based on patch by Renaud Blanch.

..

.. bpo: 22834
.. date: 8934
.. nonce: N1kAXN
.. section: Core and Builtins

If the current working directory ends up being set to a non-existent
directory then import will no longer raise FileNotFoundError.

..

.. bpo: 22869
.. date: 8933
.. nonce: rAWg-V
.. section: Core and Builtins

Move the interpreter startup & shutdown code to a new dedicated
pylifecycle.c module

..

.. bpo: 22847
.. date: 8932
.. nonce: 6baj9f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve method cache efficiency.

..

.. bpo: 22335
.. date: 8931
.. nonce: DWsXiy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when trying to enlarge a bytearray to 0x7fffffff bytes on a 32-bit
platform.

..

.. bpo: 22653
.. date: 8930
.. nonce: pCNlpv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an assertion failure in debug mode when doing a reentrant dict insertion
in debug mode.

..

.. bpo: 22643
.. date: 8929
.. nonce: xv8xev
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow in Unicode case operations (upper, lower, title,
swapcase, casefold).

..

.. bpo: 17636
.. date: 8928
.. nonce: wiqnhw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Circular imports involving relative imports are now supported.

..

.. bpo: 22604
.. date: 8927
.. nonce: yii-It
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix assertion error in debug mode when dividing a complex number by
(nan+0j).

..

.. bpo: 21052
.. date: 8926
.. nonce: -sf3tp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not raise ImportWarning when sys.path_hooks or sys.meta_path are set to
None.

..

.. bpo: 16518
.. date: 8925
.. nonce: UADwcN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use 'bytes-like object required' in error messages that previously used the
far more cryptic "'x' does not support the buffer protocol.

..

.. bpo: 22470
.. date: 8924
.. nonce: igrgN2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed integer overflow issues in "backslashreplace", "xmlcharrefreplace",
and "surrogatepass" error handlers.

..

.. bpo: 22540
.. date: 8923
.. nonce: FM72m-
.. section: Core and Builtins

speed up `PyObject_IsInstance` and `PyObject_IsSubclass` in the common case
that the second argument has metaclass `type`.

..

.. bpo: 18711
.. date: 8922
.. nonce: ds5wQa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new `PyErr_FormatV` function, similar to `PyErr_Format` but accepting
a `va_list` argument.

..

.. bpo: 22520
.. date: 8921
.. nonce: ZPJXSq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking when generating the repr of a unicode object.

..

.. bpo: 22519
.. date: 8920
.. nonce: xvJVg0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix overflow checking in PyBytes_Repr.

..

.. bpo: 22518
.. date: 8919
.. nonce: C9T6ed
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix integer overflow issues in latin-1 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 16324
.. date: 8918
.. nonce: YfrBNz
.. section: Core and Builtins

_charset parameter of MIMEText now also accepts email.charset.Charset
instances. Initial patch by Claude Paroz.

..

.. bpo: 1764286
.. date: 8917
.. nonce: L4seL2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix inspect.getsource() to support decorated functions. Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18554
.. date: 8916
.. nonce: hxnaui
.. section: Core and Builtins

os.__all__ includes posix functions.

..

.. bpo: 21391
.. date: 8915
.. nonce: 3jntPd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use os.path.abspath in the shutil module.

..

.. bpo: 11471
.. date: 8914
.. nonce: Uu752F
.. section: Core and Builtins

avoid generating a JUMP_FORWARD instruction at the end of an if-block if
there is no else-clause.  Original patch by Eugene Toder.

..

.. bpo: 22215
.. date: 8913
.. nonce: IBFi6H
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now ValueError is raised instead of TypeError when str or bytes argument
contains not permitted null character or byte.

..

.. bpo: 22258
.. date: 8912
.. nonce: 4FszMt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the internal function set_inheritable() on Illumos. This platform
exposes the function ``ioctl(FIOCLEX)``, but calling it fails with errno is
ENOTTY: "Inappropriate ioctl for device". set_inheritable() now falls back
to the slower ``fcntl()`` (``F_GETFD`` and then ``F_SETFD``).

..

.. bpo: 21389
.. date: 8911
.. nonce: dnWZBn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Displaying the __qualname__ of the underlying function in the repr of a
bound method.

..

.. bpo: 22206
.. date: 8910
.. nonce: 0i_ihB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Using pthread, PyThread_create_key() now sets errno to ENOMEM and returns -1
(error) on integer overflow.

..

.. bpo: 20184
.. date: 8909
.. nonce: bb3uHY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Argument Clinic based signature introspection added for 30 of the builtin
functions.

..

.. bpo: 22116
.. date: 8908
.. nonce: auVmIt
.. section: Core and Builtins

C functions and methods (of the 'builtin_function_or_method' type) can now
be weakref'ed.  Patch by Wei Wu.

..

.. bpo: 22077
.. date: 8907
.. nonce: KZUDR-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve index error messages for bytearrays, bytes, lists, and tuples by
adding 'or slices'. Added ', not <typename>' for bytearrays. Original patch
by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 20179
.. date: 8906
.. nonce: Nvhffc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Apply Argument Clinic to bytes and bytearray. Patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 22082
.. date: 8905
.. nonce: 6X8Qmg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Clear interned strings in slotdefs.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8904
.. nonce: tuMnCc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade Unicode database to Unicode 7.0.0.

..

.. bpo: 21897
.. date: 8903
.. nonce: kiOGHe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash with the f_locals attribute with closure variables when
frame.clear() has been called.

..

.. bpo: 21205
.. date: 8902
.. nonce: wZsx1K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new ``__qualname__`` attribute to generator, the qualified name, and
use it in the representation of a generator (``repr(gen)``). The default
name of the generator (``__name__`` attribute) is now get from the function
instead of the code. Use ``gen.gi_code.co_name`` to get the name of the
code.

..

.. bpo: 21669
.. date: 8901
.. nonce: DFDrBA
.. section: Core and Builtins

With the aid of heuristics in SyntaxError.__init__, the parser now attempts
to generate more meaningful (or at least more search engine friendly) error
messages when "exec" and "print" are used as statements.

..

.. bpo: 21642
.. date: 8900
.. nonce: -lWoKz
.. section: Core and Builtins

In the conditional if-else expression, allow an integer written with no
space between itself and the ``else`` keyword (e.g. ``True if 42else
False``) to be valid syntax.

..

.. bpo: 21523
.. date: 8899
.. nonce: f_PPYO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix over-pessimistic computation of the stack effect of some opcodes in the
compiler.  This also fixes a quadratic compilation time issue noticeable
when compiling code with a large number of "and" and "or" operators.

..

.. bpo: 21418
.. date: 8898
.. nonce: z9jp1_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in the builtin function super() when called without argument and
without current frame (ex: embedded Python).

..

.. bpo: 21425
.. date: 8897
.. nonce: i3Teb8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix flushing of standard streams in the interactive interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 21435
.. date: 8896
.. nonce: ZojVOT
.. section: Core and Builtins

In rare cases, when running finalizers on objects in cyclic trash a bad
pointer dereference could occur due to a subtle flaw in internal iteration
logic.

..

.. bpo: 21377
.. date: 8895
.. nonce: OawYfl
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyBytes_Concat() now tries to concatenate in-place when the first argument
has a reference count of 1.  Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20355
.. date: 8894
.. nonce: OrCNkZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

-W command line options now have higher priority than the PYTHONWARNINGS
environment variable.  Patch by Arfrever.

..

.. bpo: 21274
.. date: 8893
.. nonce: fVGfwq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Define PATH_MAX for GNU/Hurd in Python/pythonrun.c.

..

.. bpo: 20904
.. date: 8892
.. nonce: fAGdj2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support setting FPU precision on m68k.

..

.. bpo: 21209
.. date: 8891
.. nonce: nMljFr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix sending tuples to custom generator objects with the yield from syntax.

..

.. bpo: 21193
.. date: 8890
.. nonce: Dg98Oo
.. section: Core and Builtins

pow(a, b, c) now raises ValueError rather than TypeError when b is negative.
Patch by Josh Rosenberg.

..

.. bpo: 21176
.. date: 8889
.. nonce: mitDhW
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 465: Add the '@' operator for matrix multiplication.

..

.. bpo: 21134
.. date: 8888
.. nonce: ZL4SKo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when str is called on an uninitialized UnicodeEncodeError,
UnicodeDecodeError, or UnicodeTranslateError object.

..

.. bpo: 19537
.. date: 8887
.. nonce: AkuC_J
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix PyUnicode_DATA() alignment under m68k.  Patch by Andreas Schwab.

..

.. bpo: 20929
.. date: 8886
.. nonce: 9NlUR7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a type cast to avoid shifting a negative number.

..

.. bpo: 20731
.. date: 8885
.. nonce: _03SZg
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly position in source code files even if they are opened in text mode.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 20637
.. date: 8884
.. nonce: ppYU0o
.. section: Core and Builtins

Key-sharing now also works for instance dictionaries of subclasses.  Patch
by Peter Ingebretson.

..

.. bpo: 8297
.. date: 8883
.. nonce: _XdGON
.. section: Core and Builtins

Attributes missing from modules now include the module name in the error
text.  Original patch by ysj.ray.

..

.. bpo: 19995
.. date: 8882
.. nonce: mnHEzX
.. section: Core and Builtins

%c, %o, %x, and %X now raise TypeError on non-integer input.

..

.. bpo: 19655
.. date: 8881
.. nonce: JgVdes
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ASDL parser - used by the build process to generate code for managing
the Python AST in C - was rewritten. The new parser is self contained and
does not require to carry long the spark.py parser-generator library;
spark.py was removed from the source base.

..

.. bpo: 12546
.. date: 8880
.. nonce: 09naZ9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow ``\x00`` to be used as a fill character when using str, int, float,
and complex __format__ methods.

..

.. bpo: 20480
.. date: 8879
.. nonce: TIYPLo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add ipaddress.reverse_pointer. Patch by Leon Weber.

..

.. bpo: 13598
.. date: 8878
.. nonce: GJelrw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify string.Formatter to support auto-numbering of replacement fields. It
now matches the behavior of str.format() in this regard. Patches by Phil
Elson and Ramchandra Apte.

..

.. bpo: 8931
.. date: 8877
.. nonce: M05x4f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make alternate formatting ('#') for type 'c' raise an exception. In versions
prior to 3.5, '#' with 'c' had no effect. Now specifying it is an error.
Patch by Torsten Landschoff.

..

.. bpo: 23165
.. date: 8876
.. nonce: lk8uCE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Perform overflow checks before allocating memory in the _Py_char2wchar
function.

..

.. bpo: 23399
.. date: 8875
.. nonce: hXMYgA
.. section: Library

pyvenv creates relative symlinks where possible.

..

.. bpo: 20289
.. date: 8874
.. nonce: nio1N-
.. section: Library

cgi.FieldStorage() now supports the context management protocol.

..

.. bpo: 13128
.. date: 8873
.. nonce: vqEcsy
.. section: Library

Print response headers for CONNECT requests when debuglevel > 0. Patch by
Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 15381
.. date: 8872
.. nonce: Xv-wu8
.. section: Library

Optimized io.BytesIO to make less allocations and copyings.

..

.. bpo: 22818
.. date: 8871
.. nonce: NYdAc9
.. section: Library

Splitting on a pattern that could match an empty string now raises a
warning.  Patterns that can only match empty strings are now rejected.

..

.. bpo: 23099
.. date: 8870
.. nonce: ZASrUo
.. section: Library

Closing io.BytesIO with exported buffer is rejected now to prevent
corrupting exported buffer.

..

.. bpo: 23326
.. date: 8869
.. nonce: 8VzlZD
.. section: Library

Removed __ne__ implementations.  Since fixing default __ne__ implementation
in issue #21408 they are redundant.

..

.. bpo: 23363
.. date: 8868
.. nonce: -koaol
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.permutations.

..

.. bpo: 23364
.. date: 8867
.. nonce: 3yBV-6
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in itertools.product.

..

.. bpo: 23366
.. date: 8866
.. nonce: tyAfm8
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in itertools.combinations.

..

.. bpo: 23369
.. date: 8865
.. nonce: nqChyE
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow in _json.encode_basestring_ascii.

..

.. bpo: 23353
.. date: 8864
.. nonce: Iytkpc
.. section: Library

Fix the exception handling of generators in PyEval_EvalFrameEx(). At entry,
save or swap the exception state even if PyEval_EvalFrameEx() is called with
throwflag=0. At exit, the exception state is now always restored or swapped,
not only if why is WHY_YIELD or WHY_RETURN. Patch co-written with Antoine
Pitrou.

..

.. bpo: 14099
.. date: 8863
.. nonce: t9-HVE
.. section: Library

Restored support of writing ZIP files to tellable but non-seekable streams.

..

.. bpo: 14099
.. date: 8862
.. nonce: Myxxww
.. section: Library

Writing to ZipFile and reading multiple ZipExtFiles is threadsafe now.

..

.. bpo: 19361
.. date: 8861
.. nonce: 2mvrV3
.. section: Library

JSON decoder now raises JSONDecodeError instead of ValueError.

..

.. bpo: 18518
.. date: 8860
.. nonce: JXgicC
.. section: Library

timeit now rejects statements which can't be compiled outside a function or
a loop (e.g. "return" or "break").

..

.. bpo: 23094
.. date: 8859
.. nonce: -8AXSi
.. section: Library

Fixed readline with frames in Python implementation of pickle.

..

.. bpo: 23268
.. date: 8858
.. nonce: ATtRa5
.. section: Library

Fixed bugs in the comparison of ipaddress classes.

..

.. bpo: 21408
.. date: 8857
.. nonce: 0rI6tx
.. section: Library

Removed incorrect implementations of __ne__() which didn't returned
NotImplemented if __eq__() returned NotImplemented.  The default __ne__()
now works correctly.

..

.. bpo: 19996
.. date: 8856
.. nonce: 2-SiMf
.. section: Library

:class:`email.feedparser.FeedParser` now handles (malformed) headers with no
key rather than assuming the body has started.

..

.. bpo: 20188
.. date: 8855
.. nonce: xocY-2
.. section: Library

Support Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) in the ssl module.

..

.. bpo: 23133
.. date: 8854
.. nonce: 8p2Wnl
.. section: Library

Pickling of ipaddress objects now produces more compact and portable
representation.

..

.. bpo: 23248
.. date: 8853
.. nonce: FjcyCP
.. section: Library

Update ssl error codes from latest OpenSSL git master.

..

.. bpo: 23266
.. date: 8852
.. nonce: Mo7alR
.. section: Library

Much faster implementation of ipaddress.collapse_addresses() when there are
many non-consecutive addresses.

..

.. bpo: 23098
.. date: 8851
.. nonce: 7VwF3K
.. section: Library

64-bit dev_t is now supported in the os module.

..

.. bpo: 21817
.. date: 8850
.. nonce: xYUW-9
.. section: Library

When an exception is raised in a task submitted to a ProcessPoolExecutor,
the remote traceback is now displayed in the parent process.  Patch by
Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 15955
.. date: 8849
.. nonce: uvpBL4
.. section: Library

Add an option to limit output size when decompressing LZMA data.  Patch by
Nikolaus Rath and Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23250
.. date: 8848
.. nonce: qNGAUf
.. section: Library

In the http.cookies module, capitalize "HttpOnly" and "Secure" as they are
written in the standard.

..

.. bpo: 23063
.. date: 8847
.. nonce: 9-UJRs
.. section: Library

In the distutils' check command, fix parsing of reST with code or code-block
directives.

..

.. bpo: 23209
.. date: 8846
.. nonce: I0bCCH
.. section: Library

selectors.BaseSelector.get_key() now raises a RuntimeError if the selector
is closed. And selectors.BaseSelector.close() now clears its internal
reference to the selector mapping to break a reference cycle. Initial patch
written by Martin Richard. (See also: bpo-23225)

..

.. bpo: 17911
.. date: 8845
.. nonce: yg65Iu
.. section: Library

Provide a way to seed the linecache for a PEP-302 module without actually
loading the code.

..

.. bpo: 17911
.. date: 8844
.. nonce: qeTePa
.. section: Library

Provide a new object API for traceback, including the ability to not lookup
lines at all until the traceback is actually rendered, without any trace of
the original objects being kept alive.

..

.. bpo: 19777
.. date: 8843
.. nonce: H_NDIA
.. section: Library

Provide a home() classmethod on Path objects.  Contributed by Victor Salgado
and Mayank Tripathi.

..

.. bpo: 23206
.. date: 8842
.. nonce: xSiYwq
.. section: Library

Make ``json.dumps(..., ensure_ascii=False)`` as fast as the default case of
``ensure_ascii=True``.  Patch by Naoki Inada.

..

.. bpo: 23185
.. date: 8841
.. nonce: KHyoSO
.. section: Library

Add math.inf and math.nan constants.

..

.. bpo: 23186
.. date: 8840
.. nonce: KzWLP2
.. section: Library

Add ssl.SSLObject.shared_ciphers() and ssl.SSLSocket.shared_ciphers() to
fetch the client's list ciphers sent at handshake.

..

.. bpo: 23143
.. date: 8839
.. nonce: AWxJXV
.. section: Library

Remove compatibility with OpenSSLs older than 0.9.8.

..

.. bpo: 23132
.. date: 8838
.. nonce: pbQcut
.. section: Library

Improve performance and introspection support of comparison methods created
by functool.total_ordering.

..

.. bpo: 19776
.. date: 8837
.. nonce: BxNgxd
.. section: Library

Add an expanduser() method on Path objects.

..

.. bpo: 23112
.. date: 8836
.. nonce: dZGf82
.. section: Library

Fix SimpleHTTPServer to correctly carry the query string and fragment when
it redirects to add a trailing slash.

..

.. bpo: 21793
.. date: 8835
.. nonce: T1kQBL
.. section: Library

Added http.HTTPStatus enums (i.e. HTTPStatus.OK, HTTPStatus.NOT_FOUND).
Patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23093
.. date: 8834
.. nonce: cP7OqD
.. section: Library

In the io, module allow more operations to work on detached streams.

..

.. bpo: 23111
.. date: 8833
.. nonce: A34IA4
.. section: Library

In the ftplib, make ssl.PROTOCOL_SSLv23 the default protocol version.

..

.. bpo: 22585
.. date: 8832
.. nonce: F4BkNo
.. section: Library

On OpenBSD 5.6 and newer, os.urandom() now calls getentropy(), instead of
reading /dev/urandom, to get pseudo-random bytes.

..

.. bpo: 19104
.. date: 8831
.. nonce: _eIThy
.. section: Library

pprint now produces evaluable output for wrapped strings.

..

.. bpo: 23071
.. date: 8830
.. nonce: 3BSqF7
.. section: Library

Added missing names to codecs.__all__.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22783
.. date: 8829
.. nonce: OfYxBd
.. section: Library

Pickling now uses the NEWOBJ opcode instead of the NEWOBJ_EX opcode if
possible.

..

.. bpo: 15513
.. date: 8828
.. nonce: 7yVnRE
.. section: Library

Added a __sizeof__ implementation for pickle classes.

..

.. bpo: 19858
.. date: 8827
.. nonce: cqOlIt
.. section: Library

pickletools.optimize() now aware of the MEMOIZE opcode, can produce more
compact result and no longer produces invalid output if input data contains
MEMOIZE opcodes together with PUT or BINPUT opcodes.

..

.. bpo: 22095
.. date: 8826
.. nonce: iISzxM
.. section: Library

Fixed HTTPConnection.set_tunnel with default port.  The port value in the
host header was set to "None".  Patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23016
.. date: 8825
.. nonce: LyrPd_
.. section: Library

A warning no longer produces an AttributeError when the program is run with
pythonw.exe.

..

.. bpo: 21775
.. date: 8824
.. nonce: ELR_Al
.. section: Library

shutil.copytree(): fix crash when copying to VFAT. An exception handler
assumed that OSError objects always have a 'winerror' attribute. That is not
the case, so the exception handler itself raised AttributeError when run on
Linux (and, presumably, any other non-Windows OS). Patch by Greg Ward.

..

.. bpo: 1218234
.. date: 8823
.. nonce: 4GcoQK
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getsource() to load updated source of reloaded module. Initial
patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 21740
.. date: 8822
.. nonce: TtAApO
.. section: Library

Support wrapped callables in doctest. Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 23009
.. date: 8821
.. nonce: -sW7gk
.. section: Library

Make sure selectors.EpollSelector.select() works when no FD is registered.

..

.. bpo: 22959
.. date: 8820
.. nonce: Vxt3EP
.. section: Library

In the constructor of http.client.HTTPSConnection, prefer the context's
check_hostname attribute over the *check_hostname* parameter.

..

.. bpo: 22696
.. date: 8819
.. nonce: pvdcxs
.. section: Library

Add function :func:`sys.is_finalizing` to know about interpreter shutdown.

..

.. bpo: 16043
.. date: 8818
.. nonce: TGIC7t
.. section: Library

Add a default limit for the amount of data xmlrpclib.gzip_decode will
return. This resolves CVE-2013-1753.

..

.. bpo: 14099
.. date: 8817
.. nonce: GJ5meQ
.. section: Library

ZipFile.open() no longer reopen the underlying file.  Objects returned by
ZipFile.open() can now operate independently of the ZipFile even if the
ZipFile was created by passing in a file-like object as the first argument
to the constructor.

..

.. bpo: 22966
.. date: 8816
.. nonce: zIxDrT
.. section: Library

Fix __pycache__ pyc file name clobber when pyc_compile is asked to compile a
source file containing multiple dots in the source file name.

..

.. bpo: 21971
.. date: 8815
.. nonce: XlTc22
.. section: Library

Update turtledemo doc and add module to the index.

..

.. bpo: 21032
.. date: 8814
.. nonce: wxT_41
.. section: Library

Fixed socket leak if HTTPConnection.getresponse() fails. Original patch by
Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22407
.. date: 8813
.. nonce: CWi1wX
.. section: Library

Deprecated the use of re.LOCALE flag with str patterns or re.ASCII. It was
newer worked.

..

.. bpo: 22902
.. date: 8812
.. nonce: ZqXriA
.. section: Library

The "ip" command is now used on Linux to determine MAC address in
uuid.getnode().  Pach by Bruno Cauet.

..

.. bpo: 22960
.. date: 8811
.. nonce: 2VDILT
.. section: Library

Add a context argument to xmlrpclib.ServerProxy constructor.

..

.. bpo: 22389
.. date: 8810
.. nonce: 82DuwD
.. section: Library

Add contextlib.redirect_stderr().

..

.. bpo: 21356
.. date: 8809
.. nonce: 8NY75J
.. section: Library

Make ssl.RAND_egd() optional to support LibreSSL. The availability of the
function is checked during the compilation. Patch written by Bernard Spil.

..

.. bpo: 22915
.. date: 8808
.. nonce: 709UAo
.. section: Library

SAX parser now supports files opened with file descriptor or bytes path.

..

.. bpo: 22609
.. date: 8807
.. nonce: mmLoeb
.. section: Library

Constructors and update methods of mapping classes in the collections module
now accept the self keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 22940
.. date: 8806
.. nonce: SP99Nf
.. section: Library

Add readline.append_history_file.

..

.. bpo: 19676
.. date: 8805
.. nonce: Wijwr8
.. section: Library

Added the "namereplace" error handler.

..

.. bpo: 22788
.. date: 8804
.. nonce: vofL9e
.. section: Library

Add *context* parameter to logging.handlers.HTTPHandler.

..

.. bpo: 22921
.. date: 8803
.. nonce: a4wx1C
.. section: Library

Allow SSLContext to take the *hostname* parameter even if OpenSSL doesn't
support SNI.

..

.. bpo: 22894
.. date: 8802
.. nonce: 4AkwPA
.. section: Library

TestCase.subTest() would cause the test suite to be stopped when in failfast
mode, even in the absence of failures.

..

.. bpo: 22796
.. date: 8801
.. nonce: _pFPFA
.. section: Library

HTTP cookie parsing is now stricter, in order to protect against potential
injection attacks.

..

.. bpo: 22370
.. date: 8800
.. nonce: j4y21u
.. section: Library

Windows detection in pathlib is now more robust.

..

.. bpo: 22841
.. date: 8799
.. nonce: 8wpk7T
.. section: Library

Reject coroutines in asyncio add_signal_handler(). Patch by Ludovic.Gasc.

..

.. bpo: 19494
.. date: 8798
.. nonce: 7O5O8k
.. section: Library

Added urllib.request.HTTPBasicPriorAuthHandler. Patch by Matej Cepl.

..

.. bpo: 22578
.. date: 8797
.. nonce: 6XZ0Jf
.. section: Library

Added attributes to the re.error class.

..

.. bpo: 22849
.. date: 8796
.. nonce: AqBPyj
.. section: Library

Fix possible double free in the io.TextIOWrapper constructor.

..

.. bpo: 12728
.. date: 8795
.. nonce: rHZmXO
.. section: Library

Different Unicode characters having the same uppercase but different
lowercase are now matched in case-insensitive regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22821
.. date: 8794
.. nonce: 30cQ-U
.. section: Library

Fixed fcntl() with integer argument on 64-bit big-endian platforms.

..

.. bpo: 21650
.. date: 8793
.. nonce: 62MLqr
.. section: Library

Add an `--sort-keys` option to json.tool CLI.

..

.. bpo: 22824
.. date: 8792
.. nonce: d5Txvr
.. section: Library

Updated reprlib output format for sets to use set literals. Patch
contributed by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 22824
.. date: 8791
.. nonce: H_r9uH
.. section: Library

Updated reprlib output format for arrays to display empty arrays without an
unnecessary empty list.  Suggested by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 22406
.. date: 8790
.. nonce: sPlVbI
.. section: Library

Fixed the uu_codec codec incorrectly ported to 3.x. Based on patch by Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 17293
.. date: 8789
.. nonce: Hk06bO
.. section: Library

uuid.getnode() now determines MAC address on AIX using netstat. Based on
patch by Aivars Kalvāns.

..

.. bpo: 22769
.. date: 8788
.. nonce: PunnvQ
.. section: Library

Fixed ttk.Treeview.tag_has() when called without arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22417
.. date: 8787
.. nonce: To4b7U
.. section: Library

Verify certificates by default in httplib (PEP 476).

..

.. bpo: 22775
.. date: 8786
.. nonce: V5aCUz
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickling of http.cookies.SimpleCookie with protocol 2 and above.
Patch by Tim Graham.

..

.. bpo: 22776
.. date: 8785
.. nonce: xNcRse
.. section: Library

Brought excluded code into the scope of a try block in SysLogHandler.emit().

..

.. bpo: 22665
.. date: 8784
.. nonce: j6Jlp8
.. section: Library

Add missing get_terminal_size and SameFileError to shutil.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 6623
.. date: 8783
.. nonce: 6LOidS
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated Netrc class in the ftplib module. Patch by Matt Chaput.

..

.. bpo: 17381
.. date: 8782
.. nonce: 4J5yv7
.. section: Library

Fixed handling of case-insensitive ranges in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 22410
.. date: 8781
.. nonce: 99YFdd
.. section: Library

Module level functions in the re module now cache compiled locale-dependent
regular expressions taking into account the locale.

..

.. bpo: 22759
.. date: 8780
.. nonce: BJPdiL
.. section: Library

Query methods on pathlib.Path() (exists(), is_dir(), etc.) now return False
when the underlying stat call raises NotADirectoryError.

..

.. bpo: 8876
.. date: 8779
.. nonce: A83Av4
.. section: Library

distutils now falls back to copying files when hard linking doesn't work.
This allows use with special filesystems such as VirtualBox shared folders.

..

.. bpo: 22217
.. date: 8778
.. nonce: nXzGur
.. section: Library

Implemented reprs of classes in the zipfile module.

..

.. bpo: 22457
.. date: 8777
.. nonce: Xd2Mk-
.. section: Library

Honour load_tests in the start_dir of discovery.

..

.. bpo: 18216
.. date: 8776
.. nonce: trTZw4
.. section: Library

gettext now raises an error when a .mo file has an unsupported major version
number.  Patch by Aaron Hill.

..

.. bpo: 13918
.. date: 8775
.. nonce: -OnUhD
.. section: Library

Provide a locale.delocalize() function which can remove locale-specific
number formatting from a string representing a number, without then
converting it to a specific type.  Patch by Cédric Krier.

..

.. bpo: 22676
.. date: 8774
.. nonce: d2v8QM
.. section: Library

Make the pickling of global objects which don't have a __module__ attribute
less slow.

..

.. bpo: 18853
.. date: 8773
.. nonce: 76DrPD
.. section: Library

Fixed ResourceWarning in shlex.__nain__.

..

.. bpo: 9351
.. date: 8772
.. nonce: u5UI-6
.. section: Library

Defaults set with set_defaults on an argparse subparser are no longer
ignored when also set on the parent parser.

..

.. bpo: 7559
.. date: 8771
.. nonce: QG35ZP
.. section: Library

unittest test loading ImportErrors are reported as import errors with their
import exception rather than as attribute errors after the import has
already failed.

..

.. bpo: 19746
.. date: 8770
.. nonce: S1dg1K
.. section: Library

Make it possible to examine the errors from unittest discovery without
executing the test suite. The new `errors` attribute on TestLoader exposes
these non-fatal errors encountered during discovery.

..

.. bpo: 21991
.. date: 8769
.. nonce: Mkm0IN
.. section: Library

Make email.headerregistry's header 'params' attributes be read-only
(MappingProxyType).  Previously the dictionary was modifiable but a new one
was created on each access of the attribute.

..

.. bpo: 22638
.. date: 8768
.. nonce: Ur73gJ
.. section: Library

SSLv3 is now disabled throughout the standard library. It can still be
enabled by instantiating a SSLContext manually.

..

.. bpo: 22641
.. date: 8767
.. nonce: m0ldtl
.. section: Library

In asyncio, the default SSL context for client connections is now created
using ssl.create_default_context(), for stronger security.

..

.. bpo: 17401
.. date: 8766
.. nonce: SZd19P
.. section: Library

Include closefd in io.FileIO repr.

..

.. bpo: 21338
.. date: 8765
.. nonce: evDyHD
.. section: Library

Add silent mode for compileall. quiet parameters of compile_{dir, file,
path} functions now have a multilevel value. Also, -q option of the CLI now
have a multilevel value. Patch by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 20152
.. date: 8764
.. nonce: 9_o92A
.. section: Library

Convert the array and cmath modules to Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 18643
.. date: 8763
.. nonce: 6Qdc0J
.. section: Library

Add socket.socketpair() on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 22435
.. date: 8762
.. nonce: s2U7Zm
.. section: Library

Fix a file descriptor leak when socketserver bind fails.

..

.. bpo: 13096
.. date: 8761
.. nonce: rsailB
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault in CTypes POINTER handling of large values.

..

.. bpo: 11694
.. date: 8760
.. nonce: JuDrch
.. section: Library

Raise ConversionError in xdrlib as documented.  Patch by Filip Gruszczyński
and Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19380
.. date: 8759
.. nonce: nqgoRQ
.. section: Library

Optimized parsing of regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 1519638
.. date: 8758
.. nonce: 2pbuog
.. section: Library

Now unmatched groups are replaced with empty strings in re.sub() and
re.subn().

..

.. bpo: 18615
.. date: 8757
.. nonce: 65TxnY
.. section: Library

sndhdr.what/whathdr now return a namedtuple.

..

.. bpo: 22462
.. date: 8756
.. nonce: 1h4Kpr
.. section: Library

Fix pyexpat's creation of a dummy frame to make it appear in exception
tracebacks.

..

.. bpo: 21965
.. date: 8755
.. nonce: n_jnXs
.. section: Library

Add support for in-memory SSL to the ssl module.  Patch by Geert Jansen.

..

.. bpo: 21173
.. date: 8754
.. nonce: egkbEx
.. section: Library

Fix len() on a WeakKeyDictionary when .clear() was called with an iterator
alive.

..

.. bpo: 11866
.. date: 8753
.. nonce: xrvbIC
.. section: Library

Eliminated race condition in the computation of names for new threads.

..

.. bpo: 21905
.. date: 8752
.. nonce: coKyRo
.. section: Library

Avoid RuntimeError in pickle.whichmodule() when sys.modules is mutated while
iterating.  Patch by Olivier Grisel.

..

.. bpo: 11271
.. date: 8751
.. nonce: ZYiJru
.. section: Library

concurrent.futures.Executor.map() now takes a *chunksize* argument to allow
batching of tasks in child processes and improve performance of
ProcessPoolExecutor.  Patch by Dan O'Reilly.

..

.. bpo: 21883
.. date: 8750
.. nonce: qpuQu6
.. section: Library

os.path.join() and os.path.relpath() now raise a TypeError with more helpful
error message for unsupported or mismatched types of arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22219
.. date: 8749
.. nonce: l9Enh9
.. section: Library

The zipfile module CLI now adds entries for directories (including empty
directories) in ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 22449
.. date: 8748
.. nonce: nFW_Fl
.. section: Library

In the ssl.SSLContext.load_default_certs, consult the environmental
variables SSL_CERT_DIR and SSL_CERT_FILE on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 22508
.. date: 8747
.. nonce: 2LbnGQ
.. section: Library

The email.__version__ variable has been removed; the email code is no longer
shipped separately from the stdlib, and __version__ hasn't been updated in
several releases.

..

.. bpo: 20076
.. date: 8746
.. nonce: -7OIVB
.. section: Library

Added non derived UTF-8 aliases to locale aliases table.

..

.. bpo: 20079
.. date: 8745
.. nonce: qM949O
.. section: Library

Added locales supported in glibc 2.18 to locale alias table.

..

.. bpo: 20218
.. date: 8744
.. nonce: CMgOyE
.. section: Library

Added convenience methods read_text/write_text and read_bytes/ write_bytes
to pathlib.Path objects.

..

.. bpo: 22396
.. date: 8743
.. nonce: cQSizA
.. section: Library

On 32-bit AIX platform, don't expose os.posix_fadvise() nor
os.posix_fallocate() because their prototypes in system headers are wrong.

..

.. bpo: 22517
.. date: 8742
.. nonce: qT6-aB
.. section: Library

When an io.BufferedRWPair object is deallocated, clear its weakrefs.

..

.. bpo: 22437
.. date: 8741
.. nonce: MRVnmQ
.. section: Library

Number of capturing groups in regular expression is no longer limited by
100.

..

.. bpo: 17442
.. date: 8740
.. nonce: rnc87D
.. section: Library

InteractiveInterpreter now displays the full chained traceback in its
showtraceback method, to match the built in interactive interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 23392
.. date: 8739
.. nonce: Pe7_WK
.. section: Library

Added tests for marshal C API that works with FILE*.

..

.. bpo: 10510
.. date: 8738
.. nonce: N-ntcD
.. section: Library

distutils register and upload methods now use HTML standards compliant CRLF
line endings.

..

.. bpo: 9850
.. date: 8737
.. nonce: D-UnVi
.. section: Library

Fixed macpath.join() for empty first component.  Patch by Oleg Oshmyan.

..

.. bpo: 5309
.. date: 8736
.. nonce: pVMmQ8
.. section: Library

distutils' build and build_ext commands now accept a ``-j`` option to enable
parallel building of extension modules.

..

.. bpo: 22448
.. date: 8735
.. nonce: fAapvE
.. section: Library

Improve canceled timer handles cleanup to prevent unbound memory usage.
Patch by Joshua Moore-Oliva.

..

.. bpo: 22427
.. date: 8734
.. nonce: TZ5S_u
.. section: Library

TemporaryDirectory no longer attempts to clean up twice when used in the
with statement in generator.

..

.. bpo: 22362
.. date: 8733
.. nonce: xIBThN
.. section: Library

Forbidden ambiguous octal escapes out of range 0-0o377 in regular
expressions.

..

.. bpo: 20912
.. date: 8732
.. nonce: cAq3mZ
.. section: Library

Now directories added to ZIP file have correct Unix and MS-DOS directory
attributes.

..

.. bpo: 21866
.. date: 8731
.. nonce: hSc4wM
.. section: Library

ZipFile.close() no longer writes ZIP64 central directory records if
allowZip64 is false.

..

.. bpo: 22278
.. date: 8730
.. nonce: abqBXZ
.. section: Library

Fix urljoin problem with relative urls, a regression observed after changes
to issue22118 were submitted.

..

.. bpo: 22415
.. date: 8729
.. nonce: xJLAvI
.. section: Library

Fixed debugging output of the GROUPREF_EXISTS opcode in the re module.
Removed trailing spaces in debugging output.

..

.. bpo: 22423
.. date: 8728
.. nonce: Rtb4oT
.. section: Library

Unhandled exception in thread no longer causes unhandled AttributeError when
sys.stderr is None.

..

.. bpo: 21332
.. date: 8727
.. nonce: Gwxwlr
.. section: Library

Ensure that ``bufsize=1`` in subprocess.Popen() selects line buffering,
rather than block buffering.  Patch by Akira Li.

..

.. bpo: 21091
.. date: 8726
.. nonce: M5hAtT
.. section: Library

Fix API bug: email.message.EmailMessage.is_attachment is now a method.

..

.. bpo: 21079
.. date: 8725
.. nonce: czVcL8
.. section: Library

Fix email.message.EmailMessage.is_attachment to return the correct result
when the header has parameters as well as a value.

..

.. bpo: 22247
.. date: 8724
.. nonce: sGIpR3
.. section: Library

Add NNTPError to nntplib.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 22366
.. date: 8723
.. nonce: Dd1eFj
.. section: Library

urllib.request.urlopen will accept a context object (SSLContext) as an
argument which will then be used for HTTPS connection. Patch by Alex Gaynor.

..

.. bpo: 4180
.. date: 8722
.. nonce: QBx0JK
.. section: Library

The warnings registries are now reset when the filters are modified.

..

.. bpo: 22419
.. date: 8721
.. nonce: FqH4aC
.. section: Library

Limit the length of incoming HTTP request in wsgiref server to 65536 bytes
and send a 414 error code for higher lengths. Patch contributed by Devin
Cook.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8720
.. nonce: y7r3O2
.. section: Library

Lax cookie parsing in http.cookies could be a security issue when combined
with non-standard cookie handling in some web browsers.  Reported by Sergey
Bobrov.

..

.. bpo: 20537
.. date: 8719
.. nonce: E0CE54
.. section: Library

logging methods now accept an exception instance as well as a Boolean value
or exception tuple. Thanks to Yury Selivanov for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 22384
.. date: 8718
.. nonce: -Nl4He
.. section: Library

An exception in Tkinter callback no longer crashes the program when it is
run with pythonw.exe.

..

.. bpo: 22168
.. date: 8717
.. nonce: vLeKWC
.. section: Library

Prevent turtle AttributeError with non-default Canvas on OS X.

..

.. bpo: 21147
.. date: 8716
.. nonce: w9DE17
.. section: Library

sqlite3 now raises an exception if the request contains a null character
instead of truncating it.  Based on patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 13968
.. date: 8715
.. nonce: 1okGqm
.. section: Library

The glob module now supports recursive search in subdirectories using the
``**`` pattern.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 8714
.. nonce: 3vS4LK
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in Tkinter on AIX when called Tcl command with empty string or
tuple argument.

..

.. bpo: 21951
.. date: 8713
.. nonce: _CCC4v
.. section: Library

Tkinter now most likely raises MemoryError instead of crash if the memory
allocation fails.

..

.. bpo: 22338
.. date: 8712
.. nonce: rKlCMz
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the json module on memory allocation failure.

..

.. bpo: 12410
.. date: 8711
.. nonce: oFf-cB
.. section: Library

imaplib.IMAP4 now supports the context management protocol. Original patch
by Tarek Ziadé.

..

.. bpo: 21270
.. date: 8710
.. nonce: qMBaY-
.. section: Library

We now override tuple methods in mock.call objects so that they can be used
as normal call attributes.

..

.. bpo: 16662
.. date: 8709
.. nonce: Nghn-Y
.. section: Library

load_tests() is now unconditionally run when it is present in a package's
__init__.py.  TestLoader.loadTestsFromModule() still accepts use_load_tests,
but it is deprecated and ignored.  A new keyword-only attribute `pattern` is
added and documented.  Patch given by Robert Collins, tweaked by Barry
Warsaw.

..

.. bpo: 22226
.. date: 8708
.. nonce: T1ZMPY
.. section: Library

First letter no longer is stripped from the "status" key in the result of
Treeview.heading().

..

.. bpo: 19524
.. date: 8707
.. nonce: EQJjlF
.. section: Library

Fixed resource leak in the HTTP connection when an invalid response is
received.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 20421
.. date: 8706
.. nonce: iR0S1s
.. section: Library

Add a .version() method to SSL sockets exposing the actual protocol version
in use.

..

.. bpo: 19546
.. date: 8705
.. nonce: 8VdYBK
.. section: Library

configparser exceptions no longer expose implementation details. Chained
KeyErrors are removed, which leads to cleaner tracebacks.  Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 22051
.. date: 8704
.. nonce: cUjFqL
.. section: Library

turtledemo no longer reloads examples to re-run them. Initialization of
variables and gui setup should be done in main(), which is called each time
a demo is run, but not on import.

..

.. bpo: 21933
.. date: 8703
.. nonce: IhMjN1
.. section: Library

Turtledemo users can change the code font size with a menu selection or
control(command) '-' or '+' or control-mousewheel. Original patch by Lita
Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21597
.. date: 8702
.. nonce: aPTCWJ
.. section: Library

The separator between the turtledemo text pane and the drawing canvas can
now be grabbed and dragged with a mouse.  The code text pane can be widened
to easily view or copy the full width of the text.  The canvas can be
widened on small screens.  Original patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 18132
.. date: 8701
.. nonce: 2R2nwM
.. section: Library

Turtledemo buttons no longer disappear when the window is shrunk.  Original
patches by Jan Kanis and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 22043
.. date: 8700
.. nonce: Q6RvGL
.. section: Library

time.monotonic() is now always available. ``threading.Lock.acquire()``,
``threading.RLock.acquire()`` and socket operations now use a monotonic
clock, instead of the system clock, when a timeout is used.

..

.. bpo: 21527
.. date: 8699
.. nonce: N5WPxr
.. section: Library

Add a default number of workers to ThreadPoolExecutor equal to 5 times the
number of CPUs.  Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 22216
.. date: 8698
.. nonce: Cmalu6
.. section: Library

smtplib now resets its state more completely after a quit.  The most obvious
consequence of the previous behavior was a STARTTLS failure during a
connect/starttls/quit/connect/starttls sequence.

..

.. bpo: 22098
.. date: 8697
.. nonce: 5JYiQN
.. section: Library

ctypes' BigEndianStructure and LittleEndianStructure now define an empty
__slots__ so that subclasses don't always get an instance dict.  Patch by
Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 22185
.. date: 8696
.. nonce: 1SCCIK
.. section: Library

Fix an occasional RuntimeError in threading.Condition.wait() caused by
mutation of the waiters queue without holding the lock.  Patch by Doug
Zongker.

..

.. bpo: 22287
.. date: 8695
.. nonce: awH2AI
.. section: Library

On UNIX, _PyTime_gettimeofday() now uses clock_gettime(CLOCK_REALTIME) if
available. As a side effect, Python now depends on the librt library on
Solaris and on Linux (only with glibc older than 2.17).

..

.. bpo: 22182
.. date: 8694
.. nonce: 5EG1Bc
.. section: Library

Use e.args to unpack exceptions correctly in distutils.file_util.move_file.
Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8693
.. nonce: zBfe8J
.. section: Library

The webbrowser module now uses subprocess's start_new_session=True rather
than a potentially risky preexec_fn=os.setsid call.

..

.. bpo: 22042
.. date: 8692
.. nonce: WZvb8s
.. section: Library

signal.set_wakeup_fd(fd) now raises an exception if the file descriptor is
in blocking mode.

..

.. bpo: 16808
.. date: 8691
.. nonce: kPy_5U
.. section: Library

inspect.stack() now returns a named tuple instead of a tuple. Patch by
Daniel Shahaf.

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 8690
.. nonce: 1utXkg
.. section: Library

Fixed Tkinter images copying operations in NoDefaultRoot mode.

..

.. bpo: 2527
.. date: 8689
.. nonce: fR2GS6
.. section: Library

Add a *globals* argument to timeit functions, in order to override the
globals namespace in which the timed code is executed. Patch by Ben Roberts.

..

.. bpo: 22118
.. date: 8688
.. nonce: 3gdkOF
.. section: Library

Switch urllib.parse to use RFC 3986 semantics for the resolution of relative
URLs, rather than RFCs 1808 and 2396. Patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 21549
.. date: 8687
.. nonce: i1LVvg
.. section: Library

Added the "members" parameter to TarFile.list().

..

.. bpo: 19628
.. date: 8686
.. nonce: ssQVP8
.. section: Library

Allow compileall recursion depth to be specified with a -r option.

..

.. bpo: 15696
.. date: 8685
.. nonce: PTwXYJ
.. section: Library

Add a __sizeof__ implementation for mmap objects on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 22068
.. date: 8684
.. nonce: wCdaW0
.. section: Library

Avoided reference loops with Variables and Fonts in Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 22165
.. date: 8683
.. nonce: J1np4o
.. section: Library

SimpleHTTPRequestHandler now supports undecodable file names.

..

.. bpo: 15381
.. date: 8682
.. nonce: Ia8pf6
.. section: Library

Optimized line reading in io.BytesIO.

..

.. bpo: 8797
.. date: 8681
.. nonce: aJcIPu
.. section: Library

Raise HTTPError on failed Basic Authentication immediately. Initial patch by
Sam Bull.

..

.. bpo: 20729
.. date: 8680
.. nonce: I-1Lap
.. section: Library

Restored the use of lazy iterkeys()/itervalues()/iteritems() in the mailbox
module.

..

.. bpo: 21448
.. date: 8679
.. nonce: THJSYB
.. section: Library

Changed FeedParser feed() to avoid O(N\ :sup:`2`) behavior when parsing long line.
Original patch by Raymond Hettinger.

..

.. bpo: 22184
.. date: 8678
.. nonce: UCbSOt
.. section: Library

The functools LRU Cache decorator factory now gives an earlier and clearer
error message when the user forgets the required parameters.

..

.. bpo: 17923
.. date: 8677
.. nonce: YI_QjG
.. section: Library

glob() patterns ending with a slash no longer match non-dirs on AIX.  Based
on patch by Delhallt.

..

.. bpo: 21725
.. date: 8676
.. nonce: eIu-2N
.. section: Library

Added support for RFC 6531 (SMTPUTF8) in smtpd.

..

.. bpo: 22176
.. date: 8675
.. nonce: rgbRyg
.. section: Library

Update the ctypes module's libffi to v3.1.  This release adds support for
the Linux AArch64 and POWERPC ELF ABIv2 little endian architectures.

..

.. bpo: 5411
.. date: 8674
.. nonce: 5Utapn
.. section: Library

Added support for the "xztar" format in the shutil module.

..

.. bpo: 21121
.. date: 8673
.. nonce: ZLsRil
.. section: Library

Don't force 3rd party C extensions to be built with
-Werror=declaration-after-statement.

..

.. bpo: 21975
.. date: 8672
.. nonce: MI8ntO
.. section: Library

Fixed crash when using uninitialized sqlite3.Row (in particular when
unpickling pickled sqlite3.Row).  sqlite3.Row is now initialized in the
__new__() method.

..

.. bpo: 20170
.. date: 8671
.. nonce: 8QfhN7
.. section: Library

Convert posixmodule to use Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 21539
.. date: 8670
.. nonce: YccmZF
.. section: Library

Add an *exists_ok* argument to `Pathlib.mkdir()` to mimic `mkdir -p` and
`os.makedirs()` functionality.  When true, ignore FileExistsErrors.  Patch
by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 22127
.. date: 8669
.. nonce: 0l2OO5
.. section: Library

Bypass IDNA for pure-ASCII host names in the socket module (in particular
for numeric IPs).

..

.. bpo: 21047
.. date: 8668
.. nonce: XfUQG3
.. section: Library

set the default value for the *convert_charrefs* argument of HTMLParser to
True.  Patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8667
.. nonce: 56bAnQ
.. section: Library

Add an __all__ to html.entities.

..

.. bpo: 15114
.. date: 8666
.. nonce: jXwseC
.. section: Library

the strict mode and argument of HTMLParser, HTMLParser.error, and the
HTMLParserError exception have been removed.

..

.. bpo: 22085
.. date: 8665
.. nonce: 3JM_Aw
.. section: Library

Dropped support of Tk 8.3 in Tkinter.

..

.. bpo: 21580
.. date: 8664
.. nonce: 3ssycS
.. section: Library

Now Tkinter correctly handles bytes arguments passed to Tk. In particular
this allows initializing images from binary data.

..

.. bpo: 22003
.. date: 8663
.. nonce: 4ZIDS1
.. section: Library

When initialized from a bytes object, io.BytesIO() now defers making a copy
until it is mutated, improving performance and memory use on some use cases.
Patch by David Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 22018
.. date: 8662
.. nonce: 6ApxSH
.. section: Library

On Windows, signal.set_wakeup_fd() now also supports sockets. A side effect
is that Python depends to the WinSock library.

..

.. bpo: 22054
.. date: 8661
.. nonce: zp6Svw
.. section: Library

Add os.get_blocking() and os.set_blocking() functions to get and set the
blocking mode of a file descriptor (False if the O_NONBLOCK flag is set,
True otherwise). These functions are not available on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17172
.. date: 8660
.. nonce: R_LI_2
.. section: Library

Make turtledemo start as active on OS X even when run with subprocess.
Patch by Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21704
.. date: 8659
.. nonce: gL3ikj
.. section: Library

Fix build error for _multiprocessing when semaphores are not available.
Patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 20173
.. date: 8658
.. nonce: FAL-4L
.. section: Library

Convert sha1, sha256, sha512 and md5 to ArgumentClinic. Patch by Vajrasky
Kok.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8657
.. nonce: G25tq3
.. section: Library

Fix repr(_socket.socket) on Windows 64-bit: don't fail with OverflowError on
closed socket. repr(socket.socket) already works fine.

..

.. bpo: 22033
.. date: 8656
.. nonce: nkBNci
.. section: Library

Reprs of most Python implemented classes now contain actual class name
instead of hardcoded one.

..

.. bpo: 21947
.. date: 8655
.. nonce: mlisu-
.. section: Library

The dis module can now disassemble generator-iterator objects based on their
gi_code attribute. Patch by Clement Rouault.

..

.. bpo: 16133
.. date: 8654
.. nonce: tYuYQF
.. section: Library

The asynchat.async_chat.handle_read() method now ignores BlockingIOError
exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 22044
.. date: 8653
.. nonce: t09GRU
.. section: Library

Fixed premature DECREF in call_tzinfo_method. Patch by Tom Flanagan.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 8652
.. nonce: v73gSn
.. section: Library

readline: Disable the meta modifier key if stdout is not a terminal to not
write the ANSI sequence ``"\033[1034h"`` into stdout. This sequence is used
on some terminal (ex: TERM=xterm-256color") to enable support of 8 bit
characters.

..

.. bpo: 4350
.. date: 8651
.. nonce: nrTzJn
.. section: Library

Removed a number of out-of-dated and non-working for a long time Tkinter
methods.

..

.. bpo: 6167
.. date: 8650
.. nonce: n9dV_D
.. section: Library

Scrollbar.activate() now returns the name of active element if the argument
is not specified.  Scrollbar.set() now always accepts only 2 arguments.

..

.. bpo: 15275
.. date: 8649
.. nonce: jk0tTI
.. section: Library

Clean up and speed up the ntpath module.

..

.. bpo: 21888
.. date: 8648
.. nonce: danlpz
.. section: Library

plistlib's load() and loads() now work if the fmt parameter is specified.

..

.. bpo: 22032
.. date: 8647
.. nonce: UklzQW
.. section: Library

__qualname__ instead of __name__ is now always used to format fully
qualified class names of Python implemented classes.

..

.. bpo: 22031
.. date: 8646
.. nonce: 9aazp1
.. section: Library

Reprs now always use hexadecimal format with the "0x" prefix when contain an
id in form " at 0x...".

..

.. bpo: 22018
.. date: 8645
.. nonce: b_JTHH
.. section: Library

signal.set_wakeup_fd() now raises an OSError instead of a ValueError on
``fstat()`` failure.

..

.. bpo: 21044
.. date: 8644
.. nonce: 16xo9u
.. section: Library

tarfile.open() now handles fileobj with an integer 'name' attribute.  Based
on patch by Antoine Pietri.

..

.. bpo: 21966
.. date: 8643
.. nonce: hHD9MK
.. section: Library

Respect -q command-line option when code module is ran.

..

.. bpo: 19076
.. date: 8642
.. nonce: xCoIai
.. section: Library

Don't pass the redundant 'file' argument to self.error().

..

.. bpo: 16382
.. date: 8641
.. nonce: -XBK7z
.. section: Library

Improve exception message of warnings.warn() for bad category. Initial patch
by Phil Elson.

..

.. bpo: 21932
.. date: 8640
.. nonce: LK_5S1
.. section: Library

os.read() now uses a :c:func:`Py_ssize_t` type instead of :c:expr:`int` for
the size to support reading more than 2 GB at once. On Windows, the size is
truncated to INT_MAX. As any call to os.read(), the OS may read less bytes
than the number of requested bytes.

..

.. bpo: 21942
.. date: 8639
.. nonce: TLOS41
.. section: Library

Fixed source file viewing in pydoc's server mode on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 11259
.. date: 8638
.. nonce: GxfYnE
.. section: Library

asynchat.async_chat().set_terminator() now raises a ValueError if the number
of received bytes is negative.

..

.. bpo: 12523
.. date: 8637
.. nonce: XBdAky
.. section: Library

asynchat.async_chat.push() now raises a TypeError if it doesn't get a bytes
string

..

.. bpo: 21707
.. date: 8636
.. nonce: rrY_wd
.. section: Library

Add missing kwonlyargcount argument to ModuleFinder.replace_paths_in_code().

..

.. bpo: 20639
.. date: 8635
.. nonce: YdvOpp
.. section: Library

calling Path.with_suffix('') allows removing the suffix again.  Patch by
July Tikhonov.

..

.. bpo: 21714
.. date: 8634
.. nonce: HhkGXW
.. section: Library

Disallow the construction of invalid paths using Path.with_name().  Original
patch by Antony Lee.

..

.. bpo: 15014
.. date: 8633
.. nonce: dB50zb
.. section: Library

Added 'auth' method to smtplib to make implementing auth mechanisms simpler,
and used it internally in the login method.

..

.. bpo: 21151
.. date: 8632
.. nonce: o7IuiD
.. section: Library

Fixed a segfault in the winreg module when ``None`` is passed as a
``REG_BINARY`` value to SetValueEx.  Patch by John Ehresman.

..

.. bpo: 21090
.. date: 8631
.. nonce: 20Ooif
.. section: Library

io.FileIO.readall() does not ignore I/O errors anymore. Before, it ignored
I/O errors if at least the first C call read() succeed.

..

.. bpo: 5800
.. date: 8630
.. nonce: ZJiLZP
.. section: Library

headers parameter of wsgiref.headers.Headers is now optional. Initial patch
by Pablo Torres Navarrete and SilentGhost.

..

.. bpo: 21781
.. date: 8629
.. nonce: u_oiv9
.. section: Library

ssl.RAND_add() now supports strings longer than 2 GB.

..

.. bpo: 21679
.. date: 8628
.. nonce: CTVT9A
.. section: Library

Prevent extraneous fstat() calls during open().  Patch by Bohuslav Kabrda.

..

.. bpo: 21863
.. date: 8627
.. nonce: BzbwSL
.. section: Library

cProfile now displays the module name of C extension functions, in addition
to their own name.

..

.. bpo: 11453
.. date: 8626
.. nonce: 53Gr_R
.. section: Library

asyncore: emit a ResourceWarning when an unclosed file_wrapper object is
destroyed. The destructor now closes the file if needed. The close() method
can now be called twice: the second call does nothing.

..

.. bpo: 21858
.. date: 8625
.. nonce: 0hbFBG
.. section: Library

Better handling of Python exceptions in the sqlite3 module.

..

.. bpo: 21476
.. date: 8624
.. nonce: VN-5pW
.. section: Library

Make sure the email.parser.BytesParser TextIOWrapper is discarded after
parsing, so the input file isn't unexpectedly closed.

..

.. bpo: 20295
.. date: 8623
.. nonce: U1MPhw
.. section: Library

imghdr now recognizes OpenEXR format images.

..

.. bpo: 21729
.. date: 8622
.. nonce: dk7o_U
.. section: Library

Used the "with" statement in the dbm.dumb module to ensure files closing.
Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 21491
.. date: 8621
.. nonce: Zxmut-
.. section: Library

socketserver: Fix a race condition in child processes reaping.

..

.. bpo: 21719
.. date: 8620
.. nonce: DhQz3I
.. section: Library

Added the ``st_file_attributes`` field to os.stat_result on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 21832
.. date: 8619
.. nonce: PBA0Uu
.. section: Library

Require named tuple inputs to be exact strings.

..

.. bpo: 21722
.. date: 8618
.. nonce: WTHuRy
.. section: Library

The distutils "upload" command now exits with a non-zero return code when
uploading fails.  Patch by Martin Dengler.

..

.. bpo: 21723
.. date: 8617
.. nonce: r86fwb
.. section: Library

asyncio.Queue: support any type of number (ex: float) for the maximum size.
Patch written by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 21711
.. date: 8616
.. nonce: JWPFQZ
.. section: Library

support for "site-python" directories has now been removed from the site
module (it was deprecated in 3.4).

..

.. bpo: 17552
.. date: 8615
.. nonce: NunErD
.. section: Library

new socket.sendfile() method allowing a file to be sent over a socket by
using high-performance os.sendfile() on UNIX. Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 18039
.. date: 8614
.. nonce: vC9hNy
.. section: Library

dbm.dump.open() now always creates a new database when the flag has the
value 'n'.  Patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 21326
.. date: 8613
.. nonce: Y6iW3s
.. section: Library

Add a new is_closed() method to asyncio.BaseEventLoop. run_forever() and
run_until_complete() methods of asyncio.BaseEventLoop now raise an exception
if the event loop was closed.

..

.. bpo: 21766
.. date: 8612
.. nonce: 0xk_xC
.. section: Library

Prevent a security hole in CGIHTTPServer by URL unquoting paths before
checking for a CGI script at that path.

..

.. bpo: 21310
.. date: 8611
.. nonce: 2mjByJ
.. section: Library

Fixed possible resource leak in failed open().

..

.. bpo: 21256
.. date: 8610
.. nonce: dGq6cw
.. section: Library

Printout of keyword args should be in deterministic order in a mock function
call. This will help to write better doctests.

..

.. bpo: 21677
.. date: 8609
.. nonce: 58CDDD
.. section: Library

Fixed chaining nonnormalized exceptions in io close() methods.

..

.. bpo: 11709
.. date: 8608
.. nonce: JdObvL
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc.help function to not fail when sys.stdin is not a valid file.

..

.. bpo: 21515
.. date: 8607
.. nonce: D9TLJF
.. section: Library

tempfile.TemporaryFile now uses os.O_TMPFILE flag is available.

..

.. bpo: 13223
.. date: 8606
.. nonce: 9AzEbN
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.writedoc so that the HTML documentation for methods that use
'self' in the example code is generated correctly.

..

.. bpo: 21463
.. date: 8605
.. nonce: 09PsgH
.. section: Library

In urllib.request, fix pruning of the FTP cache.

..

.. bpo: 21618
.. date: 8604
.. nonce: 3Z7WS3
.. section: Library

The subprocess module could fail to close open fds that were inherited by
the calling process and already higher than POSIX resource limits would
otherwise allow.  On systems with a functioning /proc/self/fd or /dev/fd
interface the max is now ignored and all fds are closed.

..

.. bpo: 20383
.. date: 8603
.. nonce: pSPFpW
.. section: Library

Introduce importlib.util.module_from_spec() as the preferred way to create a
new module.

..

.. bpo: 21552
.. date: 8602
.. nonce: uVy4tM
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflow of too long string lengths in the tkinter
module on 64-bit platforms.

..

.. bpo: 14315
.. date: 8601
.. nonce: YzZzS8
.. section: Library

The zipfile module now ignores extra fields in the central directory that
are too short to be parsed instead of letting a struct.unpack error bubble
up as this "bad data" appears in many real world zip files in the wild and
is ignored by other zip tools.

..

.. bpo: 13742
.. date: 8600
.. nonce: QJiVSC
.. section: Library

Added "key" and "reverse" parameters to heapq.merge(). (First draft of patch
contributed by Simon Sapin.)

..

.. bpo: 21402
.. date: 8599
.. nonce: 51vDXt
.. section: Library

tkinter.ttk now works when default root window is not set.

..

.. bpo: 3015
.. date: 8598
.. nonce: FE_PII
.. section: Library

_tkinter.create() now creates tkapp object with wantobject=1 by default.

..

.. bpo: 10203
.. date: 8597
.. nonce: zgr0hh
.. section: Library

sqlite3.Row now truly supports sequence protocol.  In particular it supports
reverse() and negative indices.  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 18807
.. date: 8596
.. nonce: XP7p8B
.. section: Library

If copying (no symlinks) specified for a venv, then the python interpreter
aliases (python, python3) are now created by copying rather than symlinking.

..

.. bpo: 20197
.. date: 8595
.. nonce: nYR9fq
.. section: Library

Added support for the WebP image type in the imghdr module. Patch by Fabrice
Aneche and Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 21513
.. date: 8594
.. nonce: ro4AOe
.. section: Library

Speedup some properties of IP addresses (IPv4Address, IPv6Address) such as
.is_private or .is_multicast.

..

.. bpo: 21137
.. date: 8593
.. nonce: wgHb_F
.. section: Library

Improve the repr for threading.Lock() and its variants by showing the
"locked" or "unlocked" status.  Patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 21538
.. date: 8592
.. nonce: Q60FWA
.. section: Library

The plistlib module now supports loading of binary plist files when
reference or offset size is not a power of two.

..

.. bpo: 21455
.. date: 8591
.. nonce: 6-Uvv4
.. section: Library

Add a default backlog to socket.listen().

..

.. bpo: 21525
.. date: 8590
.. nonce: hAKOve
.. section: Library

Most Tkinter methods which accepted tuples now accept lists too.

..

.. bpo: 22166
.. date: 8589
.. nonce: sZYhmv
.. section: Library

With the assistance of a new internal _codecs._forget_codec helping
function, test_codecs now clears the encoding caches to avoid the appearance
of a reference leak

..

.. bpo: 22236
.. date: 8588
.. nonce: ginJSI
.. section: Library

Tkinter tests now don't reuse default root window.  New root window is
created for every test class.

..

.. bpo: 10744
.. date: 8587
.. nonce: kfV0wm
.. section: Library

Fix :pep:`3118` format strings on ctypes objects with a nontrivial shape.

..

.. bpo: 20826
.. date: 8586
.. nonce: 3rXqMC
.. section: Library

Optimize ipaddress.collapse_addresses().

..

.. bpo: 21487
.. date: 8585
.. nonce: sX8YmK
.. section: Library

Optimize ipaddress.summarize_address_range() and
ipaddress.{IPv4Network,IPv6Network}.subnets().

..

.. bpo: 21486
.. date: 8584
.. nonce: CeFKRP
.. section: Library

Optimize parsing of netmasks in ipaddress.IPv4Network and
ipaddress.IPv6Network.

..

.. bpo: 13916
.. date: 8583
.. nonce: D77YVH
.. section: Library

Disallowed the surrogatepass error handler for non UTF-\* encodings.

..

.. bpo: 20998
.. date: 8582
.. nonce: fkxpXI
.. section: Library

Fixed re.fullmatch() of repeated single character pattern with ignore case.
Original patch by Matthew Barnett.

..

.. bpo: 21075
.. date: 8581
.. nonce: f_hmEh
.. section: Library

fileinput.FileInput now reads bytes from standard stream if binary mode is
specified.  Patch by Sam Kimbrel.

..

.. bpo: 19775
.. date: 8580
.. nonce: yxxD_R
.. section: Library

Add a samefile() method to pathlib Path objects.  Initial patch by Vajrasky
Kok.

..

.. bpo: 21226
.. date: 8579
.. nonce: pzGmG1
.. section: Library

Set up modules properly in PyImport_ExecCodeModuleObject (and friends).

..

.. bpo: 21398
.. date: 8578
.. nonce: guSBXt
.. section: Library

Fix a unicode error in the pydoc pager when the documentation contains
characters not encodable to the stdout encoding.

..

.. bpo: 16531
.. date: 8577
.. nonce: AhrY_v
.. section: Library

ipaddress.IPv4Network and ipaddress.IPv6Network now accept an (address,
netmask) tuple argument, so as to easily construct network objects from
existing addresses.

..

.. bpo: 21156
.. date: 8576
.. nonce: 3dmBEp
.. section: Library

importlib.abc.InspectLoader.source_to_code() is now a staticmethod.

..

.. bpo: 21424
.. date: 8575
.. nonce: 8CJBqW
.. section: Library

Simplified and optimized heaqp.nlargest() and nmsmallest() to make fewer
tuple comparisons.

..

.. bpo: 21396
.. date: 8574
.. nonce: cqO6DN
.. section: Library

Fix TextIOWrapper(..., write_through=True) to not force a flush() on the
underlying binary stream.  Patch by akira.

..

.. bpo: 18314
.. date: 8573
.. nonce: NCd_KF
.. section: Library

Unlink now removes junctions on Windows. Patch by Kim Gräsman

..

.. bpo: 21088
.. date: 8572
.. nonce: WOg7Xy
.. section: Library

Bugfix for curses.window.addch() regression in 3.4.0. In porting to Argument
Clinic, the first two arguments were reversed.

..

.. bpo: 21407
.. date: 8571
.. nonce: cZjFde
.. section: Library

_decimal: The module now supports function signatures.

..

.. bpo: 10650
.. date: 8570
.. nonce: HYT4Oe
.. section: Library

Remove the non-standard 'watchexp' parameter from the Decimal.quantize()
method in the Python version.  It had never been present in the C version.

..

.. bpo: 21469
.. date: 8569
.. nonce: _fFGuq
.. section: Library

Reduced the risk of false positives in robotparser by checking to make sure
that robots.txt has been read or does not exist prior to returning True in
can_fetch().

..

.. bpo: 19414
.. date: 8568
.. nonce: bAAw4D
.. section: Library

Have the OrderedDict mark deleted links as unusable. This gives an early
failure if the link is deleted during iteration.

..

.. bpo: 21421
.. date: 8567
.. nonce: 5AKAat
.. section: Library

Add __slots__ to the MappingViews ABC. Patch by Josh Rosenberg.

..

.. bpo: 21101
.. date: 8566
.. nonce: Lj-_P4
.. section: Library

Eliminate double hashing in the C speed-up code for collections.Counter().

..

.. bpo: 21321
.. date: 8565
.. nonce: wUkTON
.. section: Library

itertools.islice() now releases the reference to the source iterator when
the slice is exhausted.  Patch by Anton Afanasyev.

..

.. bpo: 21057
.. date: 8564
.. nonce: 0TC4Xl
.. section: Library

TextIOWrapper now allows the underlying binary stream's read() or read1()
method to return an arbitrary bytes-like object (such as a memoryview).
Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20951
.. date: 8563
.. nonce: tF0dJi
.. section: Library

SSLSocket.send() now raises either SSLWantReadError or SSLWantWriteError on
a non-blocking socket if the operation would block. Previously, it would
return 0.  Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 13248
.. date: 8562
.. nonce: 7vtGj0
.. section: Library

removed previously deprecated asyncore.dispatcher __getattr__ cheap
inheritance hack.

..

.. bpo: 9815
.. date: 8561
.. nonce: 52FPlI
.. section: Library

assertRaises now tries to clear references to local variables in the
exception's traceback.

..

.. bpo: 19940
.. date: 8560
.. nonce: 2qtBQ8
.. section: Library

ssl.cert_time_to_seconds() now interprets the given time string in the UTC
timezone (as specified in RFC 5280), not the local timezone.

..

.. bpo: 13204
.. date: 8559
.. nonce: ZPKA5g
.. section: Library

Calling sys.flags.__new__ would crash the interpreter, now it raises a
TypeError.

..

.. bpo: 19385
.. date: 8558
.. nonce: PexO_g
.. section: Library

Make operations on a closed dbm.dumb database always raise the same
exception.

..

.. bpo: 21207
.. date: 8557
.. nonce: Hr72AB
.. section: Library

Detect when the os.urandom cached fd has been closed or replaced, and open
it anew.

..

.. bpo: 21291
.. date: 8556
.. nonce: 5sSLWN
.. section: Library

subprocess's Popen.wait() is now thread safe so that multiple threads may be
calling wait() or poll() on a Popen instance at the same time without losing
the Popen.returncode value.

..

.. bpo: 21127
.. date: 8555
.. nonce: A1aBjG
.. section: Library

Path objects can now be instantiated from str subclass instances (such as
``numpy.str_``).

..

.. bpo: 15002
.. date: 8554
.. nonce: qorYDe
.. section: Library

urllib.response object to use _TemporaryFileWrapper (and
_TemporaryFileCloser) facility. Provides a better way to handle file
descriptor close. Patch contributed by Christian Theune.

..

.. bpo: 12220
.. date: 8553
.. nonce: U25uE9
.. section: Library

mindom now raises a custom ValueError indicating it doesn't support spaces
in URIs instead of letting a 'split' ValueError bubble up.

..

.. bpo: 21068
.. date: 8552
.. nonce: 9k6N9m
.. section: Library

The ssl.PROTOCOL* constants are now enum members.

..

.. bpo: 21276
.. date: 8551
.. nonce: JkfhvQ
.. section: Library

posixmodule: Don't define USE_XATTRS on KFreeBSD and the Hurd.

..

.. bpo: 21262
.. date: 8550
.. nonce: 1J5ylk
.. section: Library

New method assert_not_called for Mock. It raises AssertionError if the mock
has been called.

..

.. bpo: 21238
.. date: 8549
.. nonce: 5CDoox
.. section: Library

New keyword argument `unsafe` to Mock. It raises `AttributeError` incase of
an attribute startswith assert or assret.

..

.. bpo: 20896
.. date: 8548
.. nonce: oWwAb1
.. section: Library

ssl.get_server_certificate() now uses PROTOCOL_SSLv23, not PROTOCOL_SSLv3,
for maximum compatibility.

..

.. bpo: 21239
.. date: 8547
.. nonce: EalCNt
.. section: Library

patch.stopall() didn't work deterministically when the same name was patched
more than once.

..

.. bpo: 21203
.. date: 8546
.. nonce: 1IMs-Z
.. section: Library

Updated fileConfig and dictConfig to remove inconsistencies. Thanks to Jure
Koren for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 21222
.. date: 8545
.. nonce: G6MQBP
.. section: Library

Passing name keyword argument to mock.create_autospec now works.

..

.. bpo: 21197
.. date: 8544
.. nonce: Gzfqdl
.. section: Library

Add lib64 -> lib symlink in venvs on 64-bit non-OS X POSIX.

..

.. bpo: 17498
.. date: 8543
.. nonce: LR9xyb
.. section: Library

Some SMTP servers disconnect after certain errors, violating strict RFC
conformance.  Instead of losing the error code when we issue the subsequent
RSET, smtplib now returns the error code and defers raising the
SMTPServerDisconnected error until the next command is issued.

..

.. bpo: 17826
.. date: 8542
.. nonce: z0zMRV
.. section: Library

setting an iterable side_effect on a mock function created by
create_autospec now works. Patch by Kushal Das.

..

.. bpo: 7776
.. date: 8541
.. nonce: K5S2Pe
.. section: Library

Fix ``Host:`` header and reconnection when using
http.client.HTTPConnection.set_tunnel(). Patch by Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 20968
.. date: 8540
.. nonce: 53Aagz
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.MagicMock now supports division. Patch by Johannes Baiter.

..

.. bpo: 21529
.. date: 8539
.. nonce: 57R_Fc
.. section: Library

Fix arbitrary memory access in JSONDecoder.raw_decode with a negative second
parameter. Bug reported by Guido Vranken. (See also: CVE-2014-4616)

..

.. bpo: 21169
.. date: 8538
.. nonce: KE7B0M
.. section: Library

getpass now handles non-ascii characters that the input stream encoding
cannot encode by re-encoding using the replace error handler.

..

.. bpo: 21171
.. date: 8537
.. nonce: iUbV9S
.. section: Library

Fixed undocumented filter API of the rot13 codec. Patch by Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 20539
.. date: 8536
.. nonce: 62nbEb
.. section: Library

Improved math.factorial error message for large positive inputs and changed
exception type (OverflowError -> ValueError) for large negative inputs.

..

.. bpo: 21172
.. date: 8535
.. nonce: dQ7yY7
.. section: Library

isinstance check relaxed from dict to collections.Mapping.

..

.. bpo: 21155
.. date: 8534
.. nonce: JSKEE7
.. section: Library

asyncio.EventLoop.create_unix_server() now raises a ValueError if path and
sock are specified at the same time.

..

.. bpo: 21136
.. date: 8533
.. nonce: JZAKv3
.. section: Library

Avoid unnecessary normalization of Fractions resulting from power and other
operations.  Patch by Raymond Hettinger.

..

.. bpo: 17621
.. date: 8532
.. nonce: 1x0mvJ
.. section: Library

Introduce importlib.util.LazyLoader.

..

.. bpo: 21076
.. date: 8531
.. nonce: upxQc6
.. section: Library

signal module constants were turned into enums. Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 20636
.. date: 8530
.. nonce: KGh-BD
.. section: Library

Improved the repr of Tkinter widgets.

..

.. bpo: 19505
.. date: 8529
.. nonce: VEtIE6
.. section: Library

The items, keys, and values views of OrderedDict now support reverse
iteration using reversed().

..

.. bpo: 21149
.. date: 8528
.. nonce: cnjwMR
.. section: Library

Improved thread-safety in logging cleanup during interpreter shutdown.
Thanks to Devin Jeanpierre for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 21058
.. date: 8527
.. nonce: IhluPP
.. section: Library

Fix a leak of file descriptor in :func:`tempfile.NamedTemporaryFile`, close
the file descriptor if :func:`io.open` fails

..

.. bpo: 21200
.. date: 8526
.. nonce: Kht8yD
.. section: Library

Return None from pkgutil.get_loader() when __spec__ is missing.

..

.. bpo: 21013
.. date: 8525
.. nonce: 3s8Ic0
.. section: Library

Enhance ssl.create_default_context() when used for server side sockets to
provide better security by default.

..

.. bpo: 20145
.. date: 8524
.. nonce: FP5FY0
.. section: Library

`assertRaisesRegex` and `assertWarnsRegex` now raise a TypeError if the
second argument is not a string or compiled regex.

..

.. bpo: 20633
.. date: 8523
.. nonce: 6kaPjT
.. section: Library

Replace relative import by absolute import.

..

.. bpo: 20980
.. date: 8522
.. nonce: cYszHY
.. section: Library

Stop wrapping exception when using ThreadPool.

..

.. bpo: 21082
.. date: 8521
.. nonce: GLzGlV
.. section: Library

In os.makedirs, do not set the process-wide umask. Note this changes
behavior of makedirs when exist_ok=True.

..

.. bpo: 20990
.. date: 8520
.. nonce: PBfjW3
.. section: Library

Fix issues found by pyflakes for multiprocessing.

..

.. bpo: 21015
.. date: 8519
.. nonce: xnwWAH
.. section: Library

SSL contexts will now automatically select an elliptic curve for ECDH key
exchange on OpenSSL 1.0.2 and later, and otherwise default to "prime256v1".

..

.. bpo: 21000
.. date: 8518
.. nonce: JUyyVV
.. section: Library

Improve the command-line interface of json.tool.

..

.. bpo: 20995
.. date: 8517
.. nonce: KSORJT
.. section: Library

Enhance default ciphers used by the ssl module to enable better security and
prioritize perfect forward secrecy.

..

.. bpo: 20884
.. date: 8516
.. nonce: qNmub_
.. section: Library

Don't assume that __file__ is defined on importlib.__init__.

..

.. bpo: 21499
.. date: 8515
.. nonce: wU4OBi
.. section: Library

Ignore __builtins__ in several test_importlib.test_api tests.

..

.. bpo: 20627
.. date: 8514
.. nonce: fgfQ1x
.. section: Library

xmlrpc.client.ServerProxy is now a context manager.

..

.. bpo: 19165
.. date: 8513
.. nonce: sAkUjU
.. section: Library

The formatter module now raises DeprecationWarning instead of
PendingDeprecationWarning.

..

.. bpo: 13936
.. date: 8512
.. nonce: _Q0Yog
.. section: Library

Remove the ability of datetime.time instances to be considered false in
boolean contexts.

..

.. bpo: 18931
.. date: 8511
.. nonce: mq4Mud
.. section: Library

selectors module now supports /dev/poll on Solaris. Patch by Giampaolo
Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 19977
.. date: 8510
.. nonce: A-sQ_V
.. section: Library

When the ``LC_TYPE`` locale is the POSIX locale (``C`` locale),
:py:data:`sys.stdin` and :py:data:`sys.stdout` are now using the
``surrogateescape`` error handler, instead of the ``strict`` error handler.

..

.. bpo: 20574
.. date: 8509
.. nonce: KaKqSs
.. section: Library

Implement incremental decoder for cp65001 code (Windows code page 65001,
Microsoft UTF-8).

..

.. bpo: 20879
.. date: 8508
.. nonce: myeYdq
.. section: Library

Delay the initialization of encoding and decoding tables for base32, ascii85
and base85 codecs in the base64 module, and delay the initialization of the
unquote_to_bytes() table of the urllib.parse module, to not waste memory if
these modules are not used.

..

.. bpo: 19157
.. date: 8507
.. nonce: V1-XhC
.. section: Library

Include the broadcast address in the usuable hosts for IPv6 in ipaddress.

..

.. bpo: 11599
.. date: 8506
.. nonce: 9QOXf4
.. section: Library

When an external command (e.g. compiler) fails, distutils now prints out the
whole command line (instead of just the command name) if the environment
variable DISTUTILS_DEBUG is set.

..

.. bpo: 4931
.. date: 8505
.. nonce: uF10hr
.. section: Library

distutils should not produce unhelpful "error: None" messages anymore.
distutils.util.grok_environment_error is kept but doc-deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 20875
.. date: 8504
.. nonce: IjfI5V
.. section: Library

Prevent possible gzip "'read' is not defined" NameError. Patch by Claudiu
Popa.

..

.. bpo: 11558
.. date: 8503
.. nonce: pxrsmq
.. section: Library

``email.message.Message.attach`` now returns a more useful error message if
``attach`` is called on a message for which ``is_multipart`` is False.

..

.. bpo: 20283
.. date: 8502
.. nonce: v0Vs9V
.. section: Library

RE pattern methods now accept the string keyword parameters as documented.
The pattern and source keyword parameters are left as deprecated aliases.

..

.. bpo: 20778
.. date: 8501
.. nonce: g_fAGI
.. section: Library

Fix modulefinder to work with bytecode-only modules.

..

.. bpo: 20791
.. date: 8500
.. nonce: n_zrkc
.. section: Library

copy.copy() now doesn't make a copy when the input is a bytes object.
Initial patch by Peter Otten.

..

.. bpo: 19748
.. date: 8499
.. nonce: kiA171
.. section: Library

On AIX, time.mktime() now raises an OverflowError for year outsize range
[1902; 2037].

..

.. bpo: 19573
.. date: 8498
.. nonce: QJvX_V
.. section: Library

inspect.signature: Use enum for parameter kind constants.

..

.. bpo: 20726
.. date: 8497
.. nonce: 0yfRDI
.. section: Library

inspect.signature: Make Signature and Parameter picklable.

..

.. bpo: 17373
.. date: 8496
.. nonce: ECwuJO
.. section: Library

Add inspect.Signature.from_callable method.

..

.. bpo: 20378
.. date: 8495
.. nonce: l9M3H-
.. section: Library

Improve repr of inspect.Signature and inspect.Parameter.

..

.. bpo: 20816
.. date: 8494
.. nonce: DFMEgN
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs() to raise correct TypeError for missing
keyword-only arguments. Patch by Jeremiah Lowin.

..

.. bpo: 20817
.. date: 8493
.. nonce: O5XyZB
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getcallargs() to fail correctly if more than 3 arguments are
missing. Patch by Jeremiah Lowin.

..

.. bpo: 6676
.. date: 8492
.. nonce: CJu5On
.. section: Library

Ensure a meaningful exception is raised when attempting to parse more than
one XML document per pyexpat xmlparser instance. (Original patches by
Hirokazu Yamamoto and Amaury Forgeot d'Arc, with suggested wording by David
Gutteridge)

..

.. bpo: 21117
.. date: 8491
.. nonce: hyH7EK
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.signature to better support functools.partial. Due to the
specifics of functools.partial implementation, positional-or-keyword
arguments passed as keyword arguments become keyword-only.

..

.. bpo: 20334
.. date: 8490
.. nonce: 0yFmfQ
.. section: Library

inspect.Signature and inspect.Parameter are now hashable. Thanks to Antony
Lee for bug reports and suggestions.

..

.. bpo: 15916
.. date: 8489
.. nonce: _vhKPn
.. section: Library

doctest.DocTestSuite returns an empty unittest.TestSuite instead of raising
ValueError if it finds no tests

..

.. bpo: 21209
.. date: 8488
.. nonce: wRE7Dn
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio.tasks.CoroWrapper to workaround a bug in yield-from
implementation in CPythons prior to 3.4.1.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8487
.. nonce: Q1I78Z
.. section: Library

asyncio: Add gi_{frame,running,code} properties to CoroWrapper (upstream
issue #163).

..

.. bpo: 21311
.. date: 8486
.. nonce: JsDF8H
.. section: Library

Avoid exception in _osx_support with non-standard compiler configurations.
Patch by John Szakmeister.

..

.. bpo: 11571
.. date: 8485
.. nonce: RPeGNo
.. section: Library

Ensure that the turtle window becomes the topmost window when launched on OS
X.

..

.. bpo: 21801
.. date: 8484
.. nonce: rzfhYl
.. section: Library

Validate that __signature__ is None or an instance of Signature.

..

.. bpo: 21923
.. date: 8483
.. nonce: hXnoZa
.. section: Library

Prevent AttributeError in distutils.sysconfig.customize_compiler due to
possible uninitialized _config_vars.

..

.. bpo: 21323
.. date: 8482
.. nonce: quiWfl
.. section: Library

Fix http.server to again handle scripts in CGI subdirectories, broken by the
fix for security issue #19435.  Patch by Zach Byrne.

..

.. bpo: 22733
.. date: 8481
.. nonce: 21gJBp
.. section: Library

Fix ffi_prep_args not zero-extending argument values correctly on 64-bit
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 23302
.. date: 8480
.. nonce: X2dabK
.. section: Library

Default to TCP_NODELAY=1 upon establishing an HTTPConnection. Removed use of
hard-coded MSS as it's an optimization that's no longer needed with Nagle
disabled.

..

.. bpo: 20577
.. date: 8479
.. nonce: Y71IMj
.. section: IDLE

Configuration of the max line length for the FormatParagraph extension has
been moved from the General tab of the Idle preferences dialog to the
FormatParagraph tab of the Config Extensions dialog. Patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 8478
.. nonce: JfHAA4
.. section: IDLE

Update Idle doc chapter to match current Idle and add new information.

..

.. bpo: 3068
.. date: 8477
.. nonce: TYjXTA
.. section: IDLE

Add Idle extension configuration dialog to Options menu. Changes are written
to HOME/.idlerc/config-extensions.cfg. Original patch by Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 16233
.. date: 8476
.. nonce: sOadNo
.. section: IDLE

A module browser (File : Class Browser, Alt+C) requires an editor window
with a filename.  When Class Browser is requested otherwise, from a shell,
output window, or 'Untitled' editor, Idle no longer displays an error box.
It now pops up an Open Module box (Alt+M). If a valid name is entered and a
module is opened, a corresponding browser is also opened.

..

.. bpo: 4832
.. date: 8475
.. nonce: GRKi9M
.. section: IDLE

Save As to type Python files automatically adds .py to the name you enter
(even if your system does not display it).  Some systems automatically add
.txt when type is Text files.

..

.. bpo: 21986
.. date: 8474
.. nonce: 04GUv2
.. section: IDLE

Code objects are not normally pickled by the pickle module. To match this,
they are no longer pickled when running under Idle.

..

.. bpo: 17390
.. date: 8473
.. nonce: I4vHFh
.. section: IDLE

Adjust Editor window title; remove 'Python', move version to end.

..

.. bpo: 14105
.. date: 8472
.. nonce: -FZwYH
.. section: IDLE

Idle debugger breakpoints no longer disappear when inserting or deleting
lines.

..

.. bpo: 17172
.. date: 8471
.. nonce: R8jkU1
.. section: IDLE

Turtledemo can now be run from Idle. Currently, the entry is on the Help
menu, but it may move to Run. Patch by Ramchandra Apt and Lita Cho.

..

.. bpo: 21765
.. date: 8470
.. nonce: JyiDbd
.. section: IDLE

Add support for non-ascii identifiers to HyperParser.

..

.. bpo: 21940
.. date: 8469
.. nonce: VlIRz7
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for WidgetRedirector. Initial patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18592
.. date: 8468
.. nonce: sMG-SZ
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for SearchDialogBase. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 21694
.. date: 8467
.. nonce: 1oLmRo
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for ParenMatch. Patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 21686
.. date: 8466
.. nonce: TAkFB0
.. section: IDLE

add unittest for HyperParser. Original patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 12387
.. date: 8465
.. nonce: XO7Ozk
.. section: IDLE

Add missing upper(lower)case versions of default Windows key bindings for
Idle so Caps Lock does not disable them. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 21695
.. date: 8464
.. nonce: g-t0Tm
.. section: IDLE

Closing a Find-in-files output window while the search is still in progress
no longer closes Idle.

..

.. bpo: 18910
.. date: 8463
.. nonce: ke8lMK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for textView. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 18292
.. date: 8462
.. nonce: ks_3wm
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoExpand. Patch by Saihadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 18409
.. date: 8461
.. nonce: 7fe-aK
.. section: IDLE

Add unittest for AutoComplete. Patch by Phil Webster.

..

.. bpo: 21477
.. date: 8460
.. nonce: 33NOe0
.. section: IDLE

htest.py - Improve framework, complete set of tests. Patches by Saimadhav
Heblikar

..

.. bpo: 18104
.. date: 8459
.. nonce: 8Fj9Pf
.. section: IDLE

Add idlelib/idle_test/htest.py with a few sample tests to begin
consolidating and improving human-validated tests of Idle. Change other
files as needed to work with htest.  Running the module as __main__ runs all
tests.

..

.. bpo: 21139
.. date: 8458
.. nonce: kqetng
.. section: IDLE

Change default paragraph width to 72, the :pep:`8` recommendation.

..

.. bpo: 21284
.. date: 8457
.. nonce: KKJfmv
.. section: IDLE

Paragraph reformat test passes after user changes reformat width.

..

.. bpo: 17654
.. date: 8456
.. nonce: NbzhNS
.. section: IDLE

Ensure IDLE menus are customized properly on OS X for non-framework builds
and for all variants of Tk.

..

.. bpo: 23180
.. date: 8455
.. nonce: cE_89F
.. section: IDLE

Rename IDLE "Windows" menu item to "Window". Patch by Al Sweigart.

..

.. bpo: 15506
.. date: 8454
.. nonce: nh8KlR
.. section: Build

Use standard PKG_PROG_PKG_CONFIG autoconf macro in the configure script.

..

.. bpo: 22935
.. date: 8453
.. nonce: -vY3lc
.. section: Build

Allow the ssl module to be compiled if openssl doesn't support SSL 3.

..

.. bpo: 22592
.. date: 8452
.. nonce: O_IE9W
.. section: Build

Drop support of the Borland C compiler to build Python. The distutils module
still supports it to build extensions.

..

.. bpo: 22591
.. date: 8451
.. nonce: wwBlG8
.. section: Build

Drop support of MS-DOS, especially of the DJGPP compiler (MS-DOS port of
GCC).

..

.. bpo: 16537
.. date: 8450
.. nonce: llFo71
.. section: Build

Check whether self.extensions is empty in setup.py. Patch by Jonathan
Hosmer.

..

.. bpo: 22359
.. date: 8449
.. nonce: YYFOFG
.. section: Build

Remove incorrect uses of recursive make.  Patch by Jonas Wagner.

..

.. bpo: 21958
.. date: 8448
.. nonce: 3rq4qR
.. section: Build

Define HAVE_ROUND when building with Visual Studio 2013 and above.  Patch by
Zachary Turner.

..

.. bpo: 18093
.. date: 8447
.. nonce: gnZieo
.. section: Build

the programs that embed the CPython runtime are now in a separate "Programs"
directory, rather than being kept in the Modules directory.

..

.. bpo: 15759
.. date: 8446
.. nonce: iGLR6O
.. section: Build

"make suspicious", "make linkcheck" and "make doctest" in Doc/ now display
special message when and only when there are failures.

..

.. bpo: 21141
.. date: 8445
.. nonce: 669LzK
.. section: Build

The Windows build process no longer attempts to find Perl, instead relying
on OpenSSL source being configured and ready to build.  The
``PCbuild\build_ssl.py`` script has been re-written and re-named to
``PCbuild\prepare_ssl.py``, and takes care of configuring OpenSSL source for
both 32 and 64 bit platforms.  OpenSSL sources obtained from svn.python.org
will always be pre-configured and ready to build.

..

.. bpo: 21037
.. date: 8444
.. nonce: v1rZzo
.. section: Build

Add a build option to enable AddressSanitizer support.

..

.. bpo: 19962
.. date: 8443
.. nonce: HDlwsE
.. section: Build

The Windows build process now creates "python.bat" in the root of the source
tree, which passes all arguments through to the most recently built
interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 21285
.. date: 8442
.. nonce: cU9p2E
.. section: Build

Refactor and fix curses configure check to always search in a ncursesw
directory.

..

.. bpo: 15234
.. date: 8441
.. nonce: vlM720
.. section: Build

For BerkeleyDB and Sqlite, only add the found library and include directories
if they aren't already being searched. This avoids an explicit runtime
library dependency.

..

.. bpo: 17861
.. date: 8440
.. nonce: jCi44U
.. section: Build

Tools/scripts/generate_opcode_h.py automatically regenerates
Include/opcode.h from Lib/opcode.py if the latter gets any change.

..

.. bpo: 20644
.. date: 8439
.. nonce: aV0zq7
.. section: Build

OS X installer build support for documentation build changes in 3.4.1:
assume externally supplied sphinx-build is available in /usr/bin.

..

.. bpo: 20022
.. date: 8438
.. nonce: EqSCTW
.. section: Build

Eliminate use of deprecated bundlebuilder in OS X builds.

..

.. bpo: 15968
.. date: 8437
.. nonce: vxUxHK
.. section: Build

Incorporated Tcl, Tk, and Tix builds into the Windows build solution.

..

.. bpo: 17095
.. date: 8436
.. nonce: -XEBIU
.. section: Build

Fix Modules/Setup *shared* support.

..

.. bpo: 21811
.. date: 8435
.. nonce: 3_Xyr-
.. section: Build

Anticipated fixes to support OS X versions > 10.9.

..

.. bpo: 21166
.. date: 8434
.. nonce: KAl7aO
.. section: Build

Prevent possible segfaults and other random failures of python
--generate-posix-vars in pybuilddir.txt build target.

..

.. bpo: 18096
.. date: 8433
.. nonce: ELyAUJ
.. section: Build

Fix library order returned by python-config.

..

.. bpo: 17219
.. date: 8432
.. nonce: q8ueQ0
.. section: Build

Add library build dir for Python extension cross-builds.

..

.. bpo: 22919
.. date: 8431
.. nonce: 1XThL9
.. section: Build

Windows build updated to support VC 14.0 (Visual Studio 2015), which will be
used for the official release.

..

.. bpo: 21236
.. date: 8430
.. nonce: 84LXxj
.. section: Build

Build _msi.pyd with cabinet.lib instead of fci.lib

..

.. bpo: 17128
.. date: 8429
.. nonce: U2biLA
.. section: Build

Use private version of OpenSSL for OS X 10.5+ installer.

..

.. bpo: 14203
.. date: 8428
.. nonce: 3hv0TX
.. section: C API

Remove obsolete support for view==NULL in PyBuffer_FillInfo(),
bytearray_getbuffer(), bytesiobuf_getbuffer() and array_buffer_getbuf(). All
functions now raise BufferError in that case.

..

.. bpo: 22445
.. date: 8427
.. nonce: s0AOAS
.. section: C API

PyBuffer_IsContiguous() now implements precise contiguity tests, compatible
with NumPy's NPY_RELAXED_STRIDES_CHECKING compilation flag.  Previously the
function reported false negatives for corner cases.

..

.. bpo: 22079
.. date: 8426
.. nonce: zhs2qM
.. section: C API

PyType_Ready() now checks that statically allocated type has no dynamically
allocated bases.

..

.. bpo: 22453
.. date: 8425
.. nonce: XoO4ns
.. section: C API

Removed non-documented macro PyObject_REPR().

..

.. bpo: 18395
.. date: 8424
.. nonce: YC9B06
.. section: C API

Rename ``_Py_char2wchar()`` to :c:func:`Py_DecodeLocale`, rename
``_Py_wchar2char()`` to :c:func:`Py_EncodeLocale`, and document these
functions.

..

.. bpo: 21233
.. date: 8423
.. nonce: 98hZAt
.. section: C API

Add new C functions: PyMem_RawCalloc(), PyMem_Calloc(), PyObject_Calloc(),
_PyObject_GC_Calloc(). bytes(int) is now using ``calloc()`` instead of
``malloc()`` for large objects which is faster and use less memory.

..

.. bpo: 20942
.. date: 8422
.. nonce: qHLJ5-
.. section: C API

PyImport_ImportFrozenModuleObject() no longer sets __file__ to match what
importlib does; this affects _frozen_importlib as well as any module loaded
using imp.init_frozen().

..

.. bpo: 19548
.. date: 8421
.. nonce: yOX8sS
.. section: Documentation

Update the codecs module documentation to better cover the distinction
between text encodings and other codecs, together with other clarifications.
Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22394
.. date: 8420
.. nonce: 6bJywY
.. section: Documentation

Doc/Makefile now supports ``make venv PYTHON=../python`` to create a venv
for generating the documentation, e.g., ``make html
PYTHON=venv/bin/python3``.

..

.. bpo: 21514
.. date: 8419
.. nonce: 1H16T6
.. section: Documentation

The documentation of the json module now refers to new JSON RFC 7159 instead
of obsoleted RFC 4627.

..

.. bpo: 21777
.. date: 8418
.. nonce: dtQCWV
.. section: Documentation

The binary sequence methods on bytes and bytearray are now documented
explicitly, rather than assuming users will be able to derive the expected
behaviour from the behaviour of the corresponding str methods.

..

.. bpo: 6916
.. date: 8417
.. nonce: 4sm3nE
.. section: Documentation

undocument deprecated asynchat.fifo class.

..

.. bpo: 17386
.. date: 8416
.. nonce: ivaGLb
.. section: Documentation

Expanded functionality of the ``Doc/make.bat`` script to make it much more
comparable to ``Doc/Makefile``.

..

.. bpo: 21312
.. date: 8415
.. nonce: 6IqcV4
.. section: Documentation

Update the thread_foobar.h template file to include newer threading APIs.
Patch by Jack McCracken.

..

.. bpo: 21043
.. date: 8414
.. nonce: oEOC8O
.. section: Documentation

Remove the recommendation for specific CA organizations and to mention the
ability to load the OS certificates.

..

.. bpo: 20765
.. date: 8413
.. nonce: Rv3GgV
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for PurePath.with_name() and
PurePath.with_suffix().

..

.. bpo: 19407
.. date: 8412
.. nonce: mRyNnG
.. section: Documentation

New package installation and distribution guides based on the Python
Packaging Authority tools. Existing guides have been retained as legacy
links from the distutils docs, as they still contain some required reference
material for tool developers that isn't recorded anywhere else.

..

.. bpo: 19697
.. date: 8411
.. nonce: 2jMQBP
.. section: Documentation

Document cases where __main__.__spec__ is None.

..

.. bpo: 18982
.. date: 8410
.. nonce: TynSM6
.. section: Tests

Add tests for CLI of the calendar module.

..

.. bpo: 19548
.. date: 8409
.. nonce: 25Kxq_
.. section: Tests

Added some additional checks to test_codecs to ensure that statements in the
updated documentation remain accurate. Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22838
.. date: 8408
.. nonce: VZBtZg
.. section: Tests

All test_re tests now work with unittest test discovery.

..

.. bpo: 22173
.. date: 8407
.. nonce: dxIIVx
.. section: Tests

Update lib2to3 tests to use unittest test discovery.

..

.. bpo: 16000
.. date: 8406
.. nonce: Y7O6TP
.. section: Tests

Convert test_curses to use unittest.

..

.. bpo: 21456
.. date: 8405
.. nonce: Axsw43
.. section: Tests

Skip two tests in test_urllib2net.py if _ssl module not present. Patch by
Remi Pointel.

..

.. bpo: 20746
.. date: 8404
.. nonce: N2pzAY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_pdb to run in refleak mode (-R).  Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 22060
.. date: 8403
.. nonce: TduJNO
.. section: Tests

test_ctypes has been somewhat cleaned up and simplified; it now uses
unittest test discovery to find its tests.

..

.. bpo: 22104
.. date: 8402
.. nonce: -YYDup
.. section: Tests

regrtest.py no longer holds a reference to the suite of tests loaded from
test modules that don't define test_main().

..

.. bpo: 22111
.. date: 8401
.. nonce: 0XlFAU
.. section: Tests

Assorted cleanups in test_imaplib.  Patch by Milan Oberkirch.

..

.. bpo: 22002
.. date: 8400
.. nonce: jpiaA2
.. section: Tests

Added ``load_package_tests`` function to test.support and used it to
implement/augment test discovery in test_asyncio, test_email,
test_importlib, test_json, and test_tools.

..

.. bpo: 21976
.. date: 8399
.. nonce: Slq6se
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl to accept LibreSSL version strings.  Thanks to William Orr.

..

.. bpo: 21918
.. date: 8398
.. nonce: QTFFSj
.. section: Tests

Converted test_tools from a module to a package containing separate test
files for each tested script.

..

.. bpo: 9554
.. date: 8397
.. nonce: VsP0Ve
.. section: Tests

Use modern unittest features in test_argparse. Initial patch by Denver
Coneybeare and Radu Voicilas.

..

.. bpo: 20155
.. date: 8396
.. nonce: nphzS3
.. section: Tests

Changed HTTP method names in failing tests in test_httpservers so that
packet filtering software (specifically Windows Base Filtering Engine) does
not interfere with the transaction semantics expected by the tests.

..

.. bpo: 19493
.. date: 8395
.. nonce: SwbzLQ
.. section: Tests

Refactored the ctypes test package to skip tests explicitly rather than
silently.

..

.. bpo: 18492
.. date: 8394
.. nonce: ylPRU7
.. section: Tests

All resources are now allowed when tests are not run by regrtest.py.

..

.. bpo: 21634
.. date: 8393
.. nonce: Eng06F
.. section: Tests

Fix pystone micro-benchmark: use floor division instead of true division to
benchmark integers instead of floating point numbers. Set pystone version to
1.2. Patch written by Lennart Regebro.

..

.. bpo: 21605
.. date: 8392
.. nonce: qsLV8d
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tkinter images.

..

.. bpo: 21493
.. date: 8391
.. nonce: NqhRsy
.. section: Tests

Added test for ntpath.expanduser().  Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 19925
.. date: 8390
.. nonce: dhMx08
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the spwd module. Original patch by Vajrasky Kok.

..

.. bpo: 21522
.. date: 8389
.. nonce: b-VwFW
.. section: Tests

Added Tkinter tests for Listbox.itemconfigure(),
PanedWindow.paneconfigure(), and Menu.entryconfigure().

..

.. bpo: 17756
.. date: 8388
.. nonce: LLfbfU
.. section: Tests

Fix test_code test when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 17752
.. date: 8387
.. nonce: P8iG44
.. section: Tests

Fix distutils tests when run from the installed location.

..

.. bpo: 18604
.. date: 8386
.. nonce: Q00Xrj
.. section: Tests

Consolidated checks for GUI availability.  All platforms now at least check
whether Tk can be instantiated when the GUI resource is requested.

..

.. bpo: 21275
.. date: 8385
.. nonce: lI5FkX
.. section: Tests

Fix a socket test on KFreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 21223
.. date: 8384
.. nonce: lMY6ka
.. section: Tests

Pass test_site/test_startup_imports when some of the extensions are built as
builtins.

..

.. bpo: 20635
.. date: 8383
.. nonce: mzWmoS
.. section: Tests

Added tests for Tk geometry managers.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8382
.. nonce: E5XNqr
.. section: Tests

Add test case for freeze.

..

.. bpo: 20743
.. date: 8381
.. nonce: hxZQUf
.. section: Tests

Fix a reference leak in test_tcl.

..

.. bpo: 21097
.. date: 8380
.. nonce: gsUesm
.. section: Tests

Move test_namespace_pkgs into test_importlib.

..

.. bpo: 21503
.. date: 8379
.. nonce: H9TPCg
.. section: Tests

Use test_both() consistently in test_importlib.

..

.. bpo: 20939
.. date: 8378
.. nonce: x3KQ35
.. section: Tests

Avoid various network test failures due to new redirect of
http://www.python.org/ to https://www.python.org: use http://www.example.com
instead.

..

.. bpo: 20668
.. date: 8377
.. nonce: IWjOSC
.. section: Tests

asyncio tests no longer rely on tests.txt file. (Patch by Vajrasky Kok)

..

.. bpo: 21093
.. date: 8376
.. nonce: CcpRim
.. section: Tests

Prevent failures of ctypes test_macholib on OS X if a copy of libz exists in
$HOME/lib or /usr/local/lib.

..

.. bpo: 22770
.. date: 8375
.. nonce: FxAh91
.. section: Tests

Prevent some Tk segfaults on OS X when running gui tests.

..

.. bpo: 23211
.. date: 8374
.. nonce: Bc-QfJ
.. section: Tests

Workaround test_logging failure on some OS X 10.6 systems.

..

.. bpo: 23345
.. date: 8373
.. nonce: HIGBKx
.. section: Tests

Prevent test_ssl failures with large OpenSSL patch level values (like
0.9.8zc).

..

.. bpo: 22314
.. date: 8372
.. nonce: ws6xsH
.. section: Tools/Demos

pydoc now works when the LINES environment variable is set.

..

.. bpo: 22615
.. date: 8371
.. nonce: My3DWN
.. section: Tools/Demos

Argument Clinic now supports the "type" argument for the int converter.
This permits using the int converter with enums and typedefs.

..

.. bpo: 20076
.. date: 8370
.. nonce: ZNuBrC
.. section: Tools/Demos

The makelocalealias.py script no longer ignores UTF-8 mapping.

..

.. bpo: 20079
.. date: 8369
.. nonce: ogPXcK
.. section: Tools/Demos

The makelocalealias.py script now can parse the SUPPORTED file from glibc
sources and supports command line options for source paths.

..

.. bpo: 22201
.. date: 8368
.. nonce: k1Awbh
.. section: Tools/Demos

Command-line interface of the zipfile module now correctly extracts ZIP
files with directory entries.  Patch by Ryan Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 22120
.. date: 8367
.. nonce: KmBUj-
.. section: Tools/Demos

For functions using an unsigned integer return converter, Argument Clinic
now generates a cast to that type for the comparison to -1 in the generated
code.  (This suppresses a compilation warning.)

..

.. bpo: 18974
.. date: 8366
.. nonce: I3DdAo
.. section: Tools/Demos

Tools/scripts/diff.py now uses argparse instead of optparse.

..

.. bpo: 21906
.. date: 8365
.. nonce: ZsKy9v
.. section: Tools/Demos

Make Tools/scripts/md5sum.py work in Python 3. Patch by Zachary Ware.

..

.. bpo: 21629
.. date: 8364
.. nonce: 9kZmQl
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix Argument Clinic's "--converters" feature.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8363
.. nonce: _-ge-g
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for ``yield from`` to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8362
.. nonce: dpFbyZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add support for the :pep:`465` matrix multiplication operator to 2to3.

..

.. bpo: 16047
.. date: 8361
.. nonce: IsgTzm
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix module exception list and __file__ handling in freeze. Patch by Meador
Inge.

..

.. bpo: 11824
.. date: 8360
.. nonce: OBWc3T
.. section: Tools/Demos

Consider ABI tags in freeze. Patch by Meador Inge.

..

.. bpo: 20535
.. date: 8359
.. nonce: 0qkvZZ
.. section: Tools/Demos

PYTHONWARNING no longer affects the run_tests.py script. Patch by Arfrever
Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 23260
.. date: 8358
.. nonce: aZ5VLH
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8357
.. nonce: _aEUNt
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of Tcl/Tk has been updated to 8.6.3.  The most visible
result of this change is the addition of new native file dialogs when
running on Windows Vista or newer.  See Tcl/Tk's TIP 432 for more
information.  Also, this version of Tcl/Tk includes support for Windows 10.

..

.. bpo: 17896
.. date: 8356
.. nonce: o79rHM
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now expect external library sources to be in
``PCbuild\..\externals`` rather than ``PCbuild\..\..``.

..

.. bpo: 17717
.. date: 8355
.. nonce: y1zoye
.. section: Windows

The Windows build scripts now use a copy of NASM pulled from svn.python.org
to build OpenSSL.

..

.. bpo: 21907
.. date: 8354
.. nonce: jm1smN
.. section: Windows

Improved the batch scripts provided for building Python.

..

.. bpo: 22644
.. date: 8353
.. nonce: gosBki
.. section: Windows

The bundled version of OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1j.

..

.. bpo: 10747
.. date: 8352
.. nonce: LTWhLn
.. section: Windows

Use versioned labels in the Windows start menu. Patch by Olive Kilburn.

..

.. bpo: 22980
.. date: 8351
.. nonce: -UypE5
.. section: Windows

.pyd files with a version and platform tag (for example, ".cp35-win32.pyd")
will now be loaded in preference to those without tags.
