.. bpo: 24467
.. date: 9236
.. nonce: BAJ80-
.. release date: 2015-07-05
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible buffer over-read in bytearray. The bytearray object now
always allocates place for trailing null byte and it's buffer now is always
null-terminated.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9235
.. nonce: 944IUY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade to Unicode 8.0.0.

..

.. bpo: 24345
.. date: 9234
.. nonce: fVcTaB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add Py_tp_finalize slot for the stable ABI.

..

.. bpo: 24400
.. date: 9233
.. nonce: 2mNeD8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Introduce a distinct type for PEP 492 coroutines; add types.CoroutineType,
inspect.getcoroutinestate, inspect.getcoroutinelocals; coroutines no longer
use CO_GENERATOR flag; sys.set_coroutine_wrapper works only for 'async def'
coroutines; inspect.iscoroutine no longer uses collections.abc.Coroutine,
it's intended to test for pure 'async def' coroutines only; add new opcode:
GET_YIELD_FROM_ITER; fix generators wrapper used in types.coroutine to be
instance of collections.abc.Generator; collections.abc.Awaitable and
collections.abc.Coroutine can no longer be used to detect generator-based
coroutines--use inspect.isawaitable instead.

..

.. bpo: 24450
.. date: 9232
.. nonce: lF0S5c
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add gi_yieldfrom to generators and cr_await to coroutines. Contributed by
Benno Leslie and Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 19235
.. date: 9231
.. nonce: 0kW4n5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add new RecursionError exception. Patch by Georg Brandl.

..

.. bpo: 21750
.. date: 9230
.. nonce: _Ycvgi
.. section: Library

mock_open.read_data can now be read from each instance, as it could in
Python 3.3.

..

.. bpo: 24552
.. date: 9229
.. nonce: VTO6sf
.. section: Library

Fix use after free in an error case of the _pickle module.

..

.. bpo: 24514
.. date: 9228
.. nonce: _xRb2r
.. section: Library

tarfile now tolerates number fields consisting of only whitespace.

..

.. bpo: 19176
.. date: 9227
.. nonce: 8V6nOK
.. section: Library

Fixed doctype() related bugs in C implementation of ElementTree. A
deprecation warning no longer issued by XMLParser subclass with default
doctype() method.  Direct call of doctype() now issues a warning.  Parser's
doctype() now is not called if target's doctype() is called.  Based on patch
by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 20387
.. date: 9226
.. nonce: aAbWbQ
.. section: Library

Restore semantic round-trip correctness in tokenize/untokenize for
tab-indented blocks.

..

.. bpo: 24456
.. date: 9225
.. nonce: yYSd2u
.. section: Library

Fixed possible buffer over-read in adpcm2lin() and lin2adpcm() functions of
the audioop module.

..

.. bpo: 24336
.. date: 9224
.. nonce: 4a5y1m
.. section: Library

The contextmanager decorator now works with functions with keyword arguments
called "func" and "self".  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 24522
.. date: 9223
.. nonce: PkcqCA
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in json accelerator module.

..

.. bpo: 24489
.. date: 9222
.. nonce: GJnMcW
.. section: Library

ensure a previously set C errno doesn't disturb cmath.polar().

..

.. bpo: 24408
.. date: 9221
.. nonce: vPb5UK
.. section: Library

Fixed AttributeError in measure() and metrics() methods of tkinter.Font.

..

.. bpo: 14373
.. date: 9220
.. nonce: CTYZ4J
.. section: Library

C implementation of functools.lru_cache() now can be used with methods.

..

.. bpo: 24347
.. date: 9219
.. nonce: CPPDb8
.. section: Library

Set KeyError if PyDict_GetItemWithError returns NULL.

..

.. bpo: 24348
.. date: 9218
.. nonce: U11rhr
.. section: Library

Drop superfluous incref/decref.

..

.. bpo: 24359
.. date: 9217
.. nonce: -IRNG9
.. section: Library

Check for changed OrderedDict size during iteration.

..

.. bpo: 24368
.. date: 9216
.. nonce: 550kDT
.. section: Library

Support keyword arguments in OrderedDict methods.

..

.. bpo: 24362
.. date: 9215
.. nonce: cHYce5
.. section: Library

Simplify the C OrderedDict fast nodes resize logic.

..

.. bpo: 24377
.. date: 9214
.. nonce: Gp1Bqr
.. section: Library

Fix a ref leak in OrderedDict.__repr__.

..

.. bpo: 24369
.. date: 9213
.. nonce: qFl7lZ
.. section: Library

Defend against key-changes during iteration.

..

.. bpo: 24373
.. date: 9212
.. nonce: 6TL2XG
.. section: Tests

_testmultiphase and xxlimited now use tp_traverse and tp_finalize to avoid
reference leaks encountered when combining tp_dealloc with PyType_FromSpec
(see issue #16690 for details)

..

.. bpo: 24458
.. date: 9211
.. nonce: 1egApX
.. section: Documentation

Update documentation to cover multi-phase initialization for extension
modules (PEP 489). Patch by Petr Viktorin.

..

.. bpo: 24351
.. date: 9210
.. nonce: XeSVl5
.. section: Documentation

Clarify what is meant by "identifier" in the context of string.Template
instances.

..

.. bpo: 24432
.. date: 9209
.. nonce: IvUSiN
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds and OS X 10.5 installer to use OpenSSL 1.0.2c.
