.. bpo: 24284
.. date: 8168
.. nonce: NvtEnc
.. release date: 2015-05-31
.. section: Core and Builtins

The startswith and endswith methods of the str class no longer return True
when finding the empty string and the indexes are completely out of range.

..

.. bpo: 24115
.. date: 8167
.. nonce: y9e_MO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update uses of PyObject_IsTrue(), PyObject_Not(), PyObject_IsInstance(),
PyObject_RichCompareBool() and _PyDict_Contains() to check for and handle
errors correctly.

..

.. bpo: 24328
.. date: 8166
.. nonce: 5gL8or
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix importing one character extension modules.

..

.. bpo: 11205
.. date: 8165
.. nonce: bikrRP
.. section: Core and Builtins

In dictionary displays, evaluate the key before the value.

..

.. bpo: 24285
.. date: 8164
.. nonce: wvJumr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed regression that prevented importing extension modules from inside
packages. Patch by Petr Viktorin.

..

.. bpo: 23247
.. date: 8163
.. nonce: nN-K74
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the StreamWriter.reset() of CJK codecs.

..

.. bpo: 24270
.. date: 8162
.. nonce: M2rJNs
.. section: Library

Add math.isclose() and cmath.isclose() functions as per PEP 485. Contributed
by Chris Barker and Tal Einat.

..

.. bpo: 5633
.. date: 8161
.. nonce: JNzKZq
.. section: Library

Fixed timeit when the statement is a string and the setup is not.

..

.. bpo: 24326
.. date: 8160
.. nonce: 4t_6Gy
.. section: Library

Fixed audioop.ratecv() with non-default weightB argument. Original patch by
David Moore.

..

.. bpo: 16991
.. date: 8159
.. nonce: 19_Zmj
.. section: Library

Add a C implementation of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 23934
.. date: 8158
.. nonce: esb-45
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.signature to fail correctly for builtin types lacking signature
information.  Initial patch by James Powell.
