.. bpo: 23573
.. date: 9263
.. nonce: HdJPs7
.. release date: 2015-07-26
.. section: Core and Builtins

Restored optimization of bytes.rfind() and bytearray.rfind() for single-byte
argument on Linux.

..

.. bpo: 24569
.. date: 9262
.. nonce: bqh6PQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make PEP 448 dictionary evaluation more consistent.

..

.. bpo: 24583
.. date: 9261
.. nonce: Ooq0Tn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when set is mutated while being updated.

..

.. bpo: 24407
.. date: 9260
.. nonce: GmCBB3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when dict is mutated while being updated.

..

.. bpo: 24619
.. date: 9259
.. nonce: cnfZGo
.. section: Core and Builtins

New approach for tokenizing async/await. As a consequence, it is now
possible to have one-line 'async def foo(): await ..' functions.

..

.. bpo: 24687
.. date: 9258
.. nonce: 0UaXFe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Plug refleak on SyntaxError in function parameters annotations.

..

.. bpo: 15944
.. date: 9257
.. nonce: 4GuwqX
.. section: Core and Builtins

memoryview: Allow arbitrary formats when casting to bytes. Patch by Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23441
.. date: 9256
.. nonce: JXt2Yt
.. section: Library

rcompleter now prints a tab character instead of displaying possible
completions for an empty word.  Initial patch by Martin Sekera.

..

.. bpo: 24683
.. date: 9255
.. nonce: aJdWEv
.. section: Library

Fixed crashes in _json functions called with arguments of inappropriate
type.

..

.. bpo: 21697
.. date: 9254
.. nonce: jpATha
.. section: Library

shutil.copytree() now correctly handles symbolic links that point to
directories.  Patch by Eduardo Seabra and Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 14373
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: Je0yDg
.. section: Library

Fixed segmentation fault when gc.collect() is called during constructing
lru_cache (C implementation).

..

.. bpo: 24695
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: QjZzFb
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in traceback.print_exception().  If exc_traceback is None
we shouldn't print a traceback header like described in the documentation.

..

.. bpo: 24620
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: rrnxB-
.. section: Library

Random.setstate() now validates the value of state last element.

..

.. bpo: 22485
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: HvJf6T
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue that caused `inspect.getsource` to return incorrect results
on nested functions.

..

.. bpo: 22153
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: 6n6yld
.. section: Library

Improve unittest docs. Patch from Martin Panter and evilzero.

..

.. bpo: 24580
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: AGi4Gm
.. section: Library

Symbolic group references to open group in re patterns now are explicitly
forbidden as well as numeric group references.

..

.. bpo: 24206
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: ffkVHH
.. section: Library

Fixed __eq__ and __ne__ methods of inspect classes.

..

.. bpo: 24631
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: uljPxM
.. section: Library

Fixed regression in the timeit module with multiline setup.

..

.. bpo: 18622
.. date: 9245
.. nonce: i6nCCW
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.mock_open().reset_mock would recurse infinitely. Patch from
Nicola Palumbo and Laurent De Buyst.

..

.. bpo: 23661
.. date: 9244
.. nonce: 5VHJmh
.. section: Library

unittest.mock side_effects can now be exceptions again. This was a
regression vs Python 3.4. Patch from Ignacio Rossi

..

.. bpo: 24608
.. date: 9243
.. nonce: 0TndL0
.. section: Library

chunk.Chunk.read() now always returns bytes, not str.

..

.. bpo: 18684
.. date: 9242
.. nonce: S2es0F
.. section: Library

Fixed reading out of the buffer in the re module.

..

.. bpo: 24259
.. date: 9241
.. nonce: vMAi1A
.. section: Library

tarfile now raises a ReadError if an archive is truncated inside a data
segment.

..

.. bpo: 15014
.. date: 9240
.. nonce: hwXwCH
.. section: Library

SMTP.auth() and SMTP.login() now support RFC 4954's optional initial-
response argument to the SMTP AUTH command.

..

.. bpo: 24669
.. date: 9239
.. nonce: kFThK0
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getsource() for 'async def' functions. Patch by Kai Groner.

..

.. bpo: 24688
.. date: 9238
.. nonce: -yWfcO
.. section: Library

ast.get_docstring() for 'async def' functions.

..

.. bpo: 24603
.. date: 9237
.. nonce: PyHyF5
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds and OS X 10.5 installer to use OpenSSL 1.0.2d.
