.. bpo: 24667
.. date: 9288
.. nonce: tdwszf
.. release date: 2015-08-09
.. section: Core and Builtins

Resize odict in all cases that the underlying dict resizes.

..

.. bpo: 24824
.. date: 9287
.. nonce: Eoc4lq
.. section: Library

Signatures of codecs.encode() and codecs.decode() now are compatible with
pydoc.

..

.. bpo: 24634
.. date: 9286
.. nonce: 7bnVgr
.. section: Library

Importing uuid should not try to load libc on Windows

..

.. bpo: 24798
.. date: 9285
.. nonce: zDXL5R
.. section: Library

_msvccompiler.py doesn't properly support manifests

..

.. bpo: 4395
.. date: 9284
.. nonce: JpT0k7
.. section: Library

Better testing and documentation of binary operators. Patch by Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 23973
.. date: 9283
.. nonce: wT59Vh
.. section: Library

Update typing.py from GitHub repo.

..

.. bpo: 23004
.. date: 9282
.. nonce: xswcPm
.. section: Library

mock_open() now reads binary data correctly when the type of read_data is
bytes.  Initial patch by Aaron Hill.

..

.. bpo: 23888
.. date: 9281
.. nonce: 7gw4oO
.. section: Library

Handle fractional time in cookie expiry. Patch by ssh.

..

.. bpo: 23652
.. date: 9280
.. nonce: DKQ_7t
.. section: Library

Make it possible to compile the select module against the libc headers from
the Linux Standard Base, which do not include some EPOLL macros.  Patch by
Matt Frank.

..

.. bpo: 22932
.. date: 9279
.. nonce: mPclSJ
.. section: Library

Fix timezones in email.utils.formatdate. Patch from Dmitry Shachnev.

..

.. bpo: 23779
.. date: 9278
.. nonce: ET4JJP
.. section: Library

imaplib raises TypeError if authenticator tries to abort. Patch from Craig
Holmquist.

..

.. bpo: 23319
.. date: 9277
.. nonce: FXyUH-
.. section: Library

Fix ctypes.BigEndianStructure, swap correctly bytes. Patch written by
Matthieu Gautier.

..

.. bpo: 23254
.. date: 9276
.. nonce: zNiy1X
.. section: Library

Document how to close the TCPServer listening socket. Patch from Martin
Panter.

..

.. bpo: 19450
.. date: 9275
.. nonce: VG7T-L
.. section: Library

Update Windows and OS X installer builds to use SQLite 3.8.11.

..

.. bpo: 17527
.. date: 9274
.. nonce: ve9fyw
.. section: Library

Add PATCH to wsgiref.validator. Patch from Luca Sbardella.

..

.. bpo: 24791
.. date: 9273
.. nonce: Ok-3nA
.. section: Library

Fix grammar regression for call syntax: 'g(\*a or b)'.

..

.. bpo: 23672
.. date: 9272
.. nonce: 8td2se
.. section: IDLE

Allow Idle to edit and run files with astral chars in name. Patch by Mohd
Sanad Zaki Rizvi.

..

.. bpo: 24745
.. date: 9271
.. nonce: edbziT
.. section: IDLE

Idle editor default font. Switch from Courier to platform-sensitive
TkFixedFont.  This should not affect current customized font selections.  If
there is a problem, edit $HOME/.idlerc/config-main.cfg and remove ':samp:`font{xxx}`'
entries from [Editor Window].  Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 21192
.. date: 9270
.. nonce: CdbipH
.. section: IDLE

Idle editor. When a file is run, put its name in the restart bar. Do not
print false prompts. Original patch by Adnan Umer.

..

.. bpo: 13884
.. date: 9269
.. nonce: vVcO1E
.. section: IDLE

Idle menus. Remove tearoff lines. Patch by Roger Serwy.

..

.. bpo: 24129
.. date: 9268
.. nonce: Imr54z
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the reference documentation for name resolution. This includes
removing the assumption that readers will be familiar with the name
resolution scheme Python used prior to the introduction of lexical scoping
for function namespaces. Patch by Ivan Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 20769
.. date: 9267
.. nonce: ZUc9z9
.. section: Documentation

Improve reload() docs. Patch by Dorian Pula.

..

.. bpo: 23589
.. date: 9266
.. nonce: rjU421
.. section: Documentation

Remove duplicate sentence from the FAQ.  Patch by Yongzhi Pan.

..

.. bpo: 24729
.. date: 9265
.. nonce: PH3A9p
.. section: Documentation

Correct IO tutorial to match implementation regarding encoding parameter to
open function.

..

.. bpo: 24751
.. date: 9264
.. nonce: pL2pbj
.. section: Tests

When running regrtest with the ``-w`` command line option, a test run is no
longer marked as a failure if all tests succeed when re-run.
