.. bpo: 29778
.. date: 2020-07-03-17-21-37
.. nonce: cR_fGS
.. release date: 2020-08-19
.. section: Security

Ensure :file:`python3.dll` is loaded from correct locations when Python is
embedded (CVE-2020-15523).

..

.. bpo: 41004
.. date: 2020-06-29-16-02-29
.. nonce: ovF0KZ
.. section: Security

CVE-2020-14422: The __hash__() methods of  ipaddress.IPv4Interface and
ipaddress.IPv6Interface incorrectly generated constant hash values of 32 and
128 respectively. This resulted in always causing hash collisions. The fix
uses hash() to generate hash values for the tuple of (address, mask length,
network address).

..

.. bpo: 39073
.. date: 2020-03-15-01-28-36
.. nonce: 6Szd3i
.. section: Security

Disallow CR or LF in email.headerregistry.Address arguments to guard against
header injection attacks.

..

.. bpo: 38576
.. date: 2020-03-14-14-57-44
.. nonce: OowwQn
.. section: Security

Disallow control characters in hostnames in http.client, addressing
CVE-2019-18348. Such potentially malicious header injection URLs now cause a
InvalidURL to be raised.

..

.. bpo: 39503
.. date: 2020-01-30-16-15-29
.. nonce: B299Yq
.. section: Security

CVE-2020-8492: The :class:`~urllib.request.AbstractBasicAuthHandler` class
of the :mod:`urllib.request` module uses an inefficient regular expression
which can be exploited by an attacker to cause a denial of service. Fix the
regex to prevent the catastrophic backtracking. Vulnerability reported by
Ben Caller and Matt Schwager.

..

.. bpo: 38945
.. date: 2019-12-01-22-44-40
.. nonce: ztmNXc
.. section: Security

Newline characters have been escaped when performing uu encoding to prevent
them from overflowing into to content section of the encoded file. This
prevents malicious or accidental modification of data during the decoding
process.

..

.. bpo: 38804
.. date: 2019-11-15-00-54-42
.. nonce: vjbM8V
.. section: Security

Fixes a ReDoS vulnerability in :mod:`http.cookiejar`. Patch by Ben Caller.

..

.. bpo: 39017
.. date: 2020-07-12-22-16-58
.. nonce: x3Cg-9
.. section: Library

Avoid infinite loop when reading specially crafted TAR files using the
tarfile module (CVE-2019-20907).

..

.. bpo: 41183
.. date: 2020-07-01-16-59-46
.. nonce: 9stVAW
.. section: Library

Use 3072 RSA keys and SHA-256 signature for test certs and keys.

..

.. bpo: 39503
.. date: 2020-03-25-16-02-16
.. nonce: YmMbYn
.. section: Library

:class:`~urllib.request.AbstractBasicAuthHandler` of :mod:`urllib.request`
now parses all WWW-Authenticate HTTP headers and accepts multiple challenges
per header: use the realm of the first Basic challenge.
