.. bpo: 29073
.. date: 9898
.. nonce: EFpHQ7
.. release date: 2017-01-02
.. section: Core and Builtins

bytearray formatting no longer truncates on first null byte.

..

.. bpo: 28932
.. date: 9897
.. nonce: QnLx8A
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not include <sys/random.h> if it does not exist.

..

.. bpo: 28147
.. date: 9896
.. nonce: EV4bm6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a memory leak in split-table dictionaries: setattr() must not convert
combined table into split table.

..

.. bpo: 25677
.. date: 9895
.. nonce: RWhZrb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correct the positioning of the syntax error caret for indented blocks.
Based on patch by Michael Layzell.

..

.. bpo: 29000
.. date: 9894
.. nonce: K6wQ-3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bytes formatting of octals with zero padding in alternate form.

..

.. bpo: 28512
.. date: 9893
.. nonce: i-pv6d
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed setting the offset attribute of SyntaxError by
PyErr_SyntaxLocationEx() and PyErr_SyntaxLocationObject().

..

.. bpo: 28991
.. date: 9892
.. nonce: -qOTxS
.. section: Core and Builtins

functools.lru_cache() was susceptible to an obscure reentrancy bug caused by
a monkey-patched len() function.

..

.. bpo: 28648
.. date: 9891
.. nonce: z7B52W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash in Py_DecodeLocale() in debug build on Mac OS X when decode
astral characters.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 19398
.. date: 9890
.. nonce: RYbEGH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Extra slash no longer added to sys.path components in case of empty compile-
time PYTHONPATH components.

..

.. bpo: 28426
.. date: 9889
.. nonce: E_quyK
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed potential crash in PyUnicode_AsDecodedObject() in debug build.

..

.. bpo: 23782
.. date: 9888
.. nonce: lonDzj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible memory leak in _PyTraceback_Add() and exception loss in
PyTraceBack_Here().

..

.. bpo: 28379
.. date: 9887
.. nonce: DuXlco
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added sanity checks and tests for PyUnicode_CopyCharacters(). Patch by Xiang
Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 28376
.. date: 9886
.. nonce: oPD-5D
.. section: Core and Builtins

The type of long range iterator is now registered as Iterator. Patch by Oren
Milman.

..

.. bpo: 28376
.. date: 9885
.. nonce: fLeHM2
.. section: Core and Builtins

The constructor of range_iterator now checks that step is not 0. Patch by
Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 26906
.. date: 9884
.. nonce: YBjcwI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Resolving special methods of uninitialized type now causes implicit
initialization of the type instead of a fail.

..

.. bpo: 18287
.. date: 9883
.. nonce: k6jffS
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyType_Ready() now checks that tp_name is not NULL. Original patch by Niklas
Koep.

..

.. bpo: 24098
.. date: 9882
.. nonce: XqlP_1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible crash when AST is changed in process of compiling it.

..

.. bpo: 28350
.. date: 9881
.. nonce: 8M5Eg9
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants with null character no longer interned.

..

.. bpo: 26617
.. date: 9880
.. nonce: Gh5LvN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when GC runs during weakref callbacks.

..

.. bpo: 27942
.. date: 9879
.. nonce: ZGuhns
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants now interned recursively in tuples and frozensets.

..

.. bpo: 21578
.. date: 9878
.. nonce: GI1bhj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed misleading error message when ImportError called with invalid keyword
args.

..

.. bpo: 28203
.. date: 9877
.. nonce: kOgvtp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect type in error message from ``complex(1.0, {2:3})``. Patch by
Soumya Sharma.

..

.. bpo: 27955
.. date: 9876
.. nonce: HC4pZ4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fallback on reading /dev/urandom device when the getrandom() syscall fails
with EPERM, for example when blocked by SECCOMP.

..

.. bpo: 28131
.. date: 9875
.. nonce: owq0wW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a regression in zipimport's compile_source().  zipimport should use the
same optimization level as the interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 25221
.. date: 9874
.. nonce: Zvkz9i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix corrupted result from PyLong_FromLong(0) when Python is compiled with
NSMALLPOSINTS = 0.

..

.. bpo: 25758
.. date: 9873
.. nonce: yR-YTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevents zipimport from unnecessarily encoding a filename (patch by Eryk
Sun)

..

.. bpo: 28189
.. date: 9872
.. nonce: c_nbR_
.. section: Core and Builtins

dictitems_contains no longer swallows compare errors. (Patch by Xiang Zhang)

..

.. bpo: 27812
.. date: 9871
.. nonce: sidcs8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly clear out a generator's frame's backreference to the generator to
prevent crashes in frame.clear().

..

.. bpo: 27811
.. date: 9870
.. nonce: T4AuBo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a coroutine that has not been awaited is finalized with
warnings-as-errors enabled.

..

.. bpo: 27587
.. date: 9869
.. nonce: mbavY2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix another issue found by PVS-Studio: Null pointer check after use of 'def'
in _PyState_AddModule(). Initial patch by Christian Heimes.

..

.. bpo: 26020
.. date: 9868
.. nonce: niLbLa
.. section: Core and Builtins

set literal evaluation order did not match documented behaviour.

..

.. bpo: 27782
.. date: 9867
.. nonce: C8OBQD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Multi-phase extension module import now correctly allows the ``m_methods``
field to be used to add module level functions to instances of non-module
types returned from ``Py_create_mod``. Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27936
.. date: 9866
.. nonce: AdOann
.. section: Core and Builtins

The round() function accepted a second None argument for some types but not
for others.  Fixed the inconsistency by accepting None for all numeric
types.

..

.. bpo: 27487
.. date: 9865
.. nonce: jeTQNr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Warn if a submodule argument to "python -m" or runpy.run_module() is found
in sys.modules after parent packages are imported, but before the submodule
is executed.

..

.. bpo: 27558
.. date: 9864
.. nonce: VmltMh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a SystemError in the implementation of "raise" statement. In a brand new
thread, raise a RuntimeError since there is no active exception to reraise.
Patch written by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27419
.. date: 9863
.. nonce: JZ94ju
.. section: Core and Builtins

Standard __import__() no longer look up "__import__" in globals or builtins
for importing submodules or "from import".  Fixed handling an error of non-
string package name.

..

.. bpo: 27083
.. date: 9862
.. nonce: F4ZT1C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Respect the PYTHONCASEOK environment variable under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 27514
.. date: 9861
.. nonce: NLbwPG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make having too many statically nested blocks a SyntaxError instead of
SystemError.

..

.. bpo: 27473
.. date: 9860
.. nonce: _nOtTA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible integer overflow in bytes and bytearray concatenations.
Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27507
.. date: 9859
.. nonce: 3pX0Be
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add integer overflow check in bytearray.extend().  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27581
.. date: 9858
.. nonce: KezjNt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't rely on wrapping for overflow check in PySequence_Tuple().  Patch by
Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27443
.. date: 9857
.. nonce: 87ZwZ1
.. section: Core and Builtins

__length_hint__() of bytearray iterators no longer return a negative integer
for a resized bytearray.

..

.. bpo: 27942
.. date: 9856
.. nonce: wCAkW5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in codeobject.c

..

.. bpo: 15812
.. date: 9855
.. nonce: R1U-Ec
.. section: Library

inspect.getframeinfo() now correctly shows the first line of a context.
Patch by Sam Breese.

..

.. bpo: 29094
.. date: 9854
.. nonce: 460ZQo
.. section: Library

Offsets in a ZIP file created with extern file object and modes "w" and "x"
now are relative to the start of the file.

..

.. bpo: 13051
.. date: 9853
.. nonce: YzC1Te
.. section: Library

Fixed recursion errors in large or resized curses.textpad.Textbox.  Based on
patch by Tycho Andersen.

..

.. bpo: 29119
.. date: 9852
.. nonce: Ov69fr
.. section: Library

Fix weakrefs in the pure python version of collections.OrderedDict
move_to_end() method. Contributed by Andra Bogildea.

..

.. bpo: 9770
.. date: 9851
.. nonce: WJJnwP
.. section: Library

curses.ascii predicates now work correctly with negative integers.

..

.. bpo: 28427
.. date: 9850
.. nonce: vUd-va
.. section: Library

old keys should not remove new values from WeakValueDictionary when
collecting from another thread.

..

.. bpo: 28923
.. date: 9849
.. nonce: naVULD
.. section: Library

Remove editor artifacts from Tix.py.

..

.. bpo: 28871
.. date: 9848
.. nonce: cPMXCJ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash when deallocate deep ElementTree.

..

.. bpo: 19542
.. date: 9847
.. nonce: 5tCkaK
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in WeakValueDictionary.setdefault() and WeakValueDictionary.pop()
when a GC collection happens in another thread.

..

.. bpo: 20191
.. date: 9846
.. nonce: P_EZ7c
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in resource.prlimit() when pass a sequence that doesn't own
its elements as limits.

..

.. bpo: 28779
.. date: 9845
.. nonce: t-mjED
.. section: Library

multiprocessing.set_forkserver_preload() would crash the forkserver process
if a preloaded module instantiated some multiprocessing objects such as
locks.

..

.. bpo: 28847
.. date: 9844
.. nonce: J7d3nG
.. section: Library

dbm.dumb now supports reading read-only files and no longer writes the index
file when it is not changed.

..

.. bpo: 25659
.. date: 9843
.. nonce: lE2IlT
.. section: Library

In ctypes, prevent a crash calling the from_buffer() and from_buffer_copy()
methods on abstract classes like Array.

..

.. bpo: 28732
.. date: 9842
.. nonce: xkG8k7
.. section: Library

Fix crash in os.spawnv() with no elements in args

..

.. bpo: 28485
.. date: 9841
.. nonce: WuKqKh
.. section: Library

Always raise ValueError for negative compileall.compile_dir(workers=...)
parameter, even when multithreading is unavailable.

..

.. bpo: 28387
.. date: 9840
.. nonce: 1clJu7
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crash in _io.TextIOWrapper deallocator when the garbage
collector is invoked in other thread.  Based on patch by Sebastian Cufre.

..

.. bpo: 27517
.. date: 9839
.. nonce: 1CYM8A
.. section: Library

LZMA compressor and decompressor no longer raise exceptions if given empty
data twice.  Patch by Benjamin Fogle.

..

.. bpo: 28549
.. date: 9838
.. nonce: ShnM2y
.. section: Library

Fixed segfault in curses's addch() with ncurses6.

..

.. bpo: 28449
.. date: 9837
.. nonce: 5JK6ES
.. section: Library

tarfile.open() with mode "r" or "r:" now tries to open a tar file with
compression before trying to open it without compression.  Otherwise it had
50% chance failed with ignore_zeros=True.

..

.. bpo: 23262
.. date: 9836
.. nonce: 6EVB7N
.. section: Library

The webbrowser module now supports Firefox 36+ and derived browsers.  Based
on patch by Oleg Broytman.

..

.. bpo: 27939
.. date: 9835
.. nonce: mTfADV
.. section: Library

Fixed bugs in tkinter.ttk.LabeledScale and tkinter.Scale caused by
representing the scale as float value internally in Tk.  tkinter.IntVar now
works if float value is set to underlying Tk variable.

..

.. bpo: 28255
.. date: 9834
.. nonce: _ZH4wm
.. section: Library

calendar.TextCalendar().prmonth() no longer prints a space at the start of
new line after printing a month's calendar.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 20491
.. date: 9833
.. nonce: ObgnQ2
.. section: Library

The textwrap.TextWrapper class now honors non-breaking spaces. Based on
patch by Kaarle Ritvanen.

..

.. bpo: 28353
.. date: 9832
.. nonce: sKGbLL
.. section: Library

os.fwalk() no longer fails on broken links.

..

.. bpo: 25464
.. date: 9831
.. nonce: HDUTCu
.. section: Library

Fixed HList.header_exists() in tkinter.tix module by addin a workaround to
Tix library bug.

..

.. bpo: 28488
.. date: 9830
.. nonce: NlkjBM
.. section: Library

shutil.make_archive() no longer add entry "./" to ZIP archive.

..

.. bpo: 24452
.. date: 9829
.. nonce: m9Kyg3
.. section: Library

Make webbrowser support Chrome on Mac OS X.

..

.. bpo: 20766
.. date: 9828
.. nonce: 4kvCzx
.. section: Library

Fix references leaked by pdb in the handling of SIGINT handlers.

..

.. bpo: 26293
.. date: 9827
.. nonce: 2mjvwX
.. section: Library

Fixed writing ZIP files that starts not from the start of the file.  Offsets
in ZIP file now are relative to the start of the archive in conforming to
the specification.

..

.. bpo: 28321
.. date: 9826
.. nonce: bQ-IIX
.. section: Library

Fixed writing non-BMP characters with binary format in plistlib.

..

.. bpo: 28322
.. date: 9825
.. nonce: l9hzap
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crashes when unpickle itertools objects from incorrect pickle
data.  Based on patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9824
.. nonce: 81jNns
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflows and crashes in the mmap module with unusual
usage patterns.

..

.. bpo: 1703178
.. date: 9823
.. nonce: meb49K
.. section: Library

Fix the ability to pass the --link-objects option to the distutils build_ext
command.

..

.. bpo: 28253
.. date: 9822
.. nonce: aLfmhe
.. section: Library

Fixed calendar functions for extreme months: 0001-01 and 9999-12.

Methods itermonthdays() and itermonthdays2() are reimplemented so that they
don't call itermonthdates() which can cause datetime.date under/overflow.

..

.. bpo: 28275
.. date: 9821
.. nonce: EhWIsz
.. section: Library

Fixed possible use after free in the decompress() methods of the
LZMADecompressor and BZ2Decompressor classes. Original patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 27897
.. date: 9820
.. nonce: I0Ppmx
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crash in sqlite3.Connection.create_collation() if pass
invalid string-like object as a name.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 18893
.. date: 9819
.. nonce: osiX5c
.. section: Library

Fix invalid exception handling in Lib/ctypes/macholib/dyld.py. Patch by
Madison May.

..

.. bpo: 27611
.. date: 9818
.. nonce: qL-UVQ
.. section: Library

Fixed support of default root window in the tkinter.tix module.

..

.. bpo: 27348
.. date: 9817
.. nonce: tDx7Vw
.. section: Library

In the traceback module, restore the formatting of exception messages like
"Exception: None".  This fixes a regression introduced in 3.5a2.

..

.. bpo: 25651
.. date: 9816
.. nonce: 3UhyPo
.. section: Library

Allow falsy values to be used for msg parameter of subTest().

..

.. bpo: 27932
.. date: 9815
.. nonce: mtgl-6
.. section: Library

Prevent memory leak in win32_ver().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9814
.. nonce: iPpjqX
.. section: Library

Fix UnboundLocalError in socket._sendfile_use_sendfile.

..

.. bpo: 28075
.. date: 9813
.. nonce: aLiUs9
.. section: Library

Check for ERROR_ACCESS_DENIED in Windows implementation of os.stat().  Patch
by Eryk Sun.

..

.. bpo: 25270
.. date: 9812
.. nonce: jrZruM
.. section: Library

Prevent codecs.escape_encode() from raising SystemError when an empty
bytestring is passed.

..

.. bpo: 28181
.. date: 9811
.. nonce: NGc4Yv
.. section: Library

Get antigravity over HTTPS. Patch by Kaartic Sivaraam.

..

.. bpo: 25895
.. date: 9810
.. nonce: j92qoQ
.. section: Library

Enable WebSocket URL schemes in urllib.parse.urljoin. Patch by Gergely Imreh
and Markus Holtermann.

..

.. bpo: 27599
.. date: 9809
.. nonce: itvm8T
.. section: Library

Fixed buffer overrun in binascii.b2a_qp() and binascii.a2b_qp().

..

.. bpo: 19003
.. date: 9808
.. nonce: UUcK_F
.. section: Library

m email.generator now replaces only ``\r`` and/or ``\n`` line endings, per
the RFC, instead of all unicode line endings.

..

.. bpo: 28019
.. date: 9807
.. nonce: KUhBaS
.. section: Library

itertools.count() no longer rounds non-integer step in range between 1.0 and
2.0 to 1.

..

.. bpo: 25969
.. date: 9806
.. nonce: qSPkl-
.. section: Library

Update the lib2to3 grammar to handle the unpacking generalizations added in
3.5.

..

.. bpo: 14977
.. date: 9805
.. nonce: 4MvALg
.. section: Library

mailcap now respects the order of the lines in the mailcap files ("first
match"), as required by RFC 1542.  Patch by Michael Lazar.

..

.. bpo: 24594
.. date: 9804
.. nonce: 9CnFVS
.. section: Library

Validates persist parameter when opening MSI database

..

.. bpo: 17582
.. date: 9803
.. nonce: MXEHxQ
.. section: Library

xml.etree.ElementTree nows preserves whitespaces in attributes (Patch by
Duane Griffin.  Reviewed and approved by Stefan Behnel.)

..

.. bpo: 28047
.. date: 9802
.. nonce: pDu3Fm
.. section: Library

Fixed calculation of line length used for the base64 CTE in the new email
policies.

..

.. bpo: 27445
.. date: 9801
.. nonce: wOG0C0
.. section: Library

Don't pass str(_charset) to MIMEText.set_payload(). Patch by Claude Paroz.

..

.. bpo: 22450
.. date: 9800
.. nonce: T3Sn_J
.. section: Library

urllib now includes an ``Accept: */*`` header among the default headers.
This makes the results of REST API requests more consistent and predictable
especially when proxy servers are involved.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9799
.. nonce: PVZStR
.. section: Library

lib2to3.pgen3.driver.load_grammar() now creates a stable cache file between
runs given the same Grammar.txt input regardless of the hash randomization
setting.

..

.. bpo: 27570
.. date: 9798
.. nonce: pU0Zie
.. section: Library

Avoid zero-length memcpy() etc calls with null source pointers in the
"ctypes" and "array" modules.

..

.. bpo: 22233
.. date: 9797
.. nonce: uXSN0R
.. section: Library

Break email header lines *only* on the RFC specified CR and LF characters,
not on arbitrary unicode line breaks.  This also fixes a bug in HTTP header
parsing.

..

.. bpo: 27988
.. date: 9796
.. nonce: VfMzZH
.. section: Library

Fix email iter_attachments incorrect mutation of payload list.

..

.. bpo: 27691
.. date: 9795
.. nonce: TMYF5_
.. section: Library

Fix ssl module's parsing of GEN_RID subject alternative name fields in X.509
certs.

..

.. bpo: 27850
.. date: 9794
.. nonce: kIVQ0m
.. section: Library

Remove 3DES from ssl module's default cipher list to counter measure sweet32
attack (CVE-2016-2183).

..

.. bpo: 27766
.. date: 9793
.. nonce: WI70Tc
.. section: Library

Add ChaCha20 Poly1305 to ssl module's default ciper list. (Required OpenSSL
1.1.0 or LibreSSL).

..

.. bpo: 26470
.. date: 9792
.. nonce: QGu_wo
.. section: Library

Port ssl and hashlib module to OpenSSL 1.1.0.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9791
.. nonce: 6TjEgz
.. section: Library

Remove support for passing a file descriptor to os.access. It never worked
but previously didn't raise.

..

.. bpo: 12885
.. date: 9790
.. nonce: r-IV1g
.. section: Library

Fix error when distutils encounters symlink.

..

.. bpo: 27881
.. date: 9789
.. nonce: fkETd9
.. section: Library

Fixed possible bugs when setting sqlite3.Connection.isolation_level. Based
on patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27861
.. date: 9788
.. nonce: DBYuo9
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in sqlite3.Connection.cursor() when a factory creates not a
cursor.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 9787
.. nonce: MO8AWH
.. section: Library

Avoid spurious output on OS X with Gnu Readline.

..

.. bpo: 27706
.. date: 9786
.. nonce: ZY67yu
.. section: Library

Restore deterministic behavior of random.Random().seed() for string seeds
using seeding version 1.  Allows sequences of calls to random() to exactly
match those obtained in Python 2. Patch by Nofar Schnider.

..

.. bpo: 10513
.. date: 9785
.. nonce: tQIQD_
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in Connection.commit().  Statements should not be reset
after a commit.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9784
.. nonce: cYraeH
.. section: Library

A new version of typing.py from https://github.com/python/typing: -
Collection (only for 3.6) (Issue #27598) - Add FrozenSet to __all__
(upstream #261) - fix crash in _get_type_vars() (upstream #259) - Remove the
dict constraint in ForwardRef._eval_type (upstream #252)

..

.. bpo: 27539
.. date: 9783
.. nonce: S4L1cq
.. section: Library

Fix unnormalised ``Fraction.__pow__`` result in the case of negative
exponent and negative base.

..

.. bpo: 21718
.. date: 9782
.. nonce: FUJd-7
.. section: Library

cursor.description is now available for queries using CTEs.

..

.. bpo: 2466
.. date: 9781
.. nonce: VRNlkg
.. section: Library

posixpath.ismount now correctly recognizes mount points which the user does
not have permission to access.

..

.. bpo: 27773
.. date: 9780
.. nonce: hMSSeX
.. section: Library

Correct some memory management errors server_hostname in _ssl.wrap_socket().

..

.. bpo: 26750
.. date: 9779
.. nonce: rv76vt
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.create_autospec() now works properly for subclasses of
property() and other data descriptors.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9778
.. nonce: Ny9oPv
.. section: Library

In the curses module, raise an error if window.getstr() or window.instr() is
passed a negative value.

..

.. bpo: 27783
.. date: 9777
.. nonce: cR1jXH
.. section: Library

Fix possible usage of uninitialized memory in operator.methodcaller.

..

.. bpo: 27774
.. date: 9776
.. nonce: FDcik1
.. section: Library

Fix possible Py_DECREF on unowned object in _sre.

..

.. bpo: 27760
.. date: 9775
.. nonce: gxMjp4
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in binascii.b2a_qp.

..

.. bpo: 27758
.. date: 9774
.. nonce: 0NRV03
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in the _csv module for large record lengths.

..

.. bpo: 27568
.. date: 9773
.. nonce: OnuO9s
.. section: Library

Prevent HTTPoxy attack (CVE-2016-1000110). Ignore the HTTP_PROXY variable
when REQUEST_METHOD environment is set, which indicates that the script is
in CGI mode.

..

.. bpo: 27656
.. date: 9772
.. nonce: joTscM
.. section: Library

Do not assume sched.h defines any SCHED_* constants.

..

.. bpo: 27130
.. date: 9771
.. nonce: SUxwXZ
.. section: Library

In the "zlib" module, fix handling of large buffers (typically 4 GiB) when
compressing and decompressing.  Previously, inputs were limited to 4 GiB,
and compression and decompression operations did not properly handle results
of 4 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 27533
.. date: 9770
.. nonce: iDmKzV
.. section: Library

Release GIL in nt._isdir

..

.. bpo: 17711
.. date: 9769
.. nonce: 47AILJ
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickling by the persistent ID with protocol 0. Original patch by
Alexandre Vassalotti.

..

.. bpo: 27522
.. date: 9768
.. nonce: 8vVz_t
.. section: Library

Avoid an unintentional reference cycle in email.feedparser.

..

.. bpo: 26844
.. date: 9767
.. nonce: I0wdnY
.. section: Library

Fix error message for imp.find_module() to refer to 'path' instead of
'name'. Patch by Lev Maximov.

..

.. bpo: 23804
.. date: 9766
.. nonce: ipFvxc
.. section: Library

Fix SSL zero-length recv() calls to not block and not raise an error about
unclean EOF.

..

.. bpo: 27466
.. date: 9765
.. nonce: C_3a8E
.. section: Library

Change time format returned by http.cookie.time2netscape, confirming the
netscape cookie format and making it consistent with documentation.

..

.. bpo: 26664
.. date: 9764
.. nonce: OzsSzf
.. section: Library

Fix activate.fish by removing mis-use of ``$``.

..

.. bpo: 22115
.. date: 9763
.. nonce: apoFQ9
.. section: Library

Fixed tracing Tkinter variables: trace_vdelete() with wrong mode no longer
break tracing, trace_vinfo() now always returns a list of pairs of strings,
tracing in the "u" mode now works.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9762
.. nonce: oZOeFE
.. section: Library

Fix a scoping issue in importlib.util.LazyLoader which triggered an
UnboundLocalError when lazy-loading a module that was already put into
sys.modules.

..

.. bpo: 27079
.. date: 9761
.. nonce: c7d0Ym
.. section: Library

Fixed curses.ascii functions isblank(), iscntrl() and ispunct().

..

.. bpo: 26754
.. date: 9760
.. nonce: J3n0QW
.. section: Library

Some functions (compile() etc) accepted a filename argument encoded as an
iterable of integers. Now only strings and byte-like objects are accepted.

..

.. bpo: 27048
.. date: 9759
.. nonce: EVe-Bk
.. section: Library

Prevents distutils failing on Windows when environment variables contain
non-ASCII characters

..

.. bpo: 27330
.. date: 9758
.. nonce: GJaFCV
.. section: Library

Fixed possible leaks in the ctypes module.

..

.. bpo: 27238
.. date: 9757
.. nonce: Q6v6Qv
.. section: Library

Got rid of bare excepts in the turtle module.  Original patch by Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. bpo: 27122
.. date: 9756
.. nonce: 06t7zN
.. section: Library

When an exception is raised within the context being managed by a
contextlib.ExitStack() and one of the exit stack generators catches and
raises it in a chain, do not re-raise the original exception when exiting,
let the new chained one through.  This avoids the PEP 479 bug described in
issue25782.

..

.. bpo: 27278
.. date: 9755
.. nonce: y_HkGw
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

Fix os.urandom() implementation using getrandom() on Linux.  Truncate size
to INT_MAX and loop until we collected enough random bytes, instead of
casting a directly Py_ssize_t to int.

..

.. bpo: 26386
.. date: 9754
.. nonce: 9L3Ut4
.. section: Library

Fixed ttk.TreeView selection operations with item id's containing spaces.

..

.. bpo: 22636
.. date: 9753
.. nonce: 3fQW_g
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

Avoid shell injection problems with ctypes.util.find_library().

..

.. bpo: 16182
.. date: 9752
.. nonce: RgFXyr
.. section: Library

Fix various functions in the "readline" module to use the locale encoding,
and fix get_begidx() and get_endidx() to return code point indexes.

..

.. bpo: 27392
.. date: 9751
.. nonce: obfni7
.. section: Library

Add loop.connect_accepted_socket(). Patch by Jim Fulton.

..

.. bpo: 27930
.. date: 9750
.. nonce: BkOfSi
.. section: Library

Improved behaviour of logging.handlers.QueueListener. Thanks to Paulo
Andrade and Petr Viktorin for the analysis and patch.

..

.. bpo: 21201
.. date: 9749
.. nonce: wLCKiA
.. section: Library

Improves readability of multiprocessing error message.  Thanks to Wojciech
Walczak for patch.

..

.. bpo: 27456
.. date: 9748
.. nonce: lI_IE7
.. section: Library

asyncio: Set TCP_NODELAY by default.

..

.. bpo: 27906
.. date: 9747
.. nonce: TBBXrv
.. section: Library

Fix socket accept exhaustion during high TCP traffic. Patch by Kevin Conway.

..

.. bpo: 28174
.. date: 9746
.. nonce: CV1UdI
.. section: Library

Handle when SO_REUSEPORT isn't properly supported. Patch by Seth Michael
Larson.

..

.. bpo: 26654
.. date: 9745
.. nonce: XtzTE9
.. section: Library

Inspect functools.partial in asyncio.Handle.__repr__. Patch by iceboy.

..

.. bpo: 26909
.. date: 9744
.. nonce: ASiakT
.. section: Library

Fix slow pipes IO in asyncio. Patch by INADA Naoki.

..

.. bpo: 28176
.. date: 9743
.. nonce: sU8R6L
.. section: Library

Fix callbacks race in asyncio.SelectorLoop.sock_connect.

..

.. bpo: 27759
.. date: 9742
.. nonce: qpMDGq
.. section: Library

Fix selectors incorrectly retain invalid file descriptors. Patch by Mark
Williams.

..

.. bpo: 28368
.. date: 9741
.. nonce: n594X4
.. section: Library

Refuse monitoring processes if the child watcher has no loop attached. Patch
by Vincent Michel.

..

.. bpo: 28369
.. date: 9740
.. nonce: 8DTANe
.. section: Library

Raise RuntimeError when transport's FD is used with add_reader, add_writer,
etc.

..

.. bpo: 28370
.. date: 9739
.. nonce: 18jBuZ
.. section: Library

Speedup asyncio.StreamReader.readexactly. Patch by Коренберг Марк.

..

.. bpo: 28371
.. date: 9738
.. nonce: U9Zqdk
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing asyncio.Handles to run_in_executor.

..

.. bpo: 28372
.. date: 9737
.. nonce: njcIPk
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio to support formatting of non-python coroutines.

..

.. bpo: 28399
.. date: 9736
.. nonce: QKIqRX
.. section: Library

Remove UNIX socket from FS before binding. Patch by Коренберг Марк.

..

.. bpo: 27972
.. date: 9735
.. nonce: ZK-GFm
.. section: Library

Prohibit Tasks to await on themselves.

..

.. bpo: 26923
.. date: 9734
.. nonce: 8dh3AV
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio.Gather to refuse being cancelled once all children are done.
Patch by Johannes Ebke.

..

.. bpo: 26796
.. date: 9733
.. nonce: TZyAfJ
.. section: Library

Don't configure the number of workers for default threadpool executor.
Initial patch by Hans Lawrenz.

..

.. bpo: 28600
.. date: 9732
.. nonce: 2ThUQV
.. section: Library

Optimize loop.call_soon().

..

.. bpo: 28613
.. date: 9731
.. nonce: sqUPrv
.. section: Library

Fix get_event_loop() return the current loop if called from
coroutines/callbacks.

..

.. bpo: 28639
.. date: 9730
.. nonce: WUPo1o
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.isawaitable to always return bool Patch by Justin Mayfield.

..

.. bpo: 28652
.. date: 9729
.. nonce: f5M8FG
.. section: Library

Make loop methods reject socket kinds they do not support.

..

.. bpo: 28653
.. date: 9728
.. nonce: S5bA9i
.. section: Library

Fix a refleak in functools.lru_cache.

..

.. bpo: 28703
.. date: 9727
.. nonce: CRLTJc
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio.iscoroutinefunction to handle Mock objects.

..

.. bpo: 24142
.. date: 9726
.. nonce: _BgogI
.. section: Library

Reading a corrupt config file left the parser in an invalid state.  Original
patch by Florian Höch.

..

.. bpo: 28990
.. date: 9725
.. nonce: W8tuYZ
.. section: Library

Fix SSL hanging if connection is closed before handshake completed. (Patch
by HoHo-Ho)

..

.. bpo: 15308
.. date: 9724
.. nonce: zZxn8m
.. section: IDLE

Add 'interrupt execution' (^C) to Shell menu. Patch by Roger Serwy, updated
by Bayard Randel.

..

.. bpo: 27922
.. date: 9723
.. nonce: UEtEv9
.. section: IDLE

Stop IDLE tests from 'flashing' gui widgets on the screen.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9722
.. nonce: zWZs6o
.. section: IDLE

Add version to title of IDLE help window.

..

.. bpo: 25564
.. date: 9721
.. nonce: GN0p14
.. section: IDLE

In section on IDLE -- console differences, mention that using exec means
that __builtins__ is defined for each statement.

..

.. bpo: 27714
.. date: 9720
.. nonce: bUEDsI
.. section: IDLE

text_textview and test_autocomplete now pass when re-run in the same
process.  This occurs when test_idle fails when run with the -w option but
without -jn.  Fix warning from test_config.

..

.. bpo: 25507
.. date: 9719
.. nonce: lxf68d
.. section: IDLE

IDLE no longer runs buggy code because of its tkinter imports. Users must
include the same imports required to run directly in Python.

..

.. bpo: 27452
.. date: 9718
.. nonce: RtWnyR
.. section: IDLE

add line counter and crc to IDLE configHandler test dump.

..

.. bpo: 27365
.. date: 9717
.. nonce: y7ys_A
.. section: IDLE

Allow non-ascii chars in IDLE NEWS.txt, for contributor names.

..

.. bpo: 27245
.. date: 9716
.. nonce: u9aKO1
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: Cleanly delete custom themes and key bindings. Previously, when IDLE
was started from a console or by import, a cascade of warnings was emitted.
Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 28808
.. date: 9715
.. nonce: A03X6r
.. section: C API

PyUnicode_CompareWithASCIIString() now never raises exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 26754
.. date: 9714
.. nonce: j2czHF
.. section: C API

PyUnicode_FSDecoder() accepted a filename argument encoded as an iterable of
integers. Now only strings and bytes-like objects are accepted.

..

.. bpo: 28513
.. date: 9713
.. nonce: L3joAz
.. section: Documentation

Documented command-line interface of zipfile.

..

.. bpo: 28950
.. date: 9712
.. nonce: 9_vY6R
.. section: Tests

Disallow -j0 to be combined with -T/-l/-M in regrtest command line
arguments.

..

.. bpo: 28666
.. date: 9711
.. nonce: RtTk-4
.. section: Tests

Now test.support.rmtree is able to remove unwritable or unreadable
directories.

..

.. bpo: 23839
.. date: 9710
.. nonce: zsT_L9
.. section: Tests

Various caches now are cleared before running every test file.

..

.. bpo: 28409
.. date: 9709
.. nonce: Q2IlxJ
.. section: Tests

regrtest: fix the parser of command line arguments.

..

.. bpo: 27787
.. date: 9708
.. nonce: kf0YAt
.. section: Tests

Call gc.collect() before checking each test for "dangling threads", since
the dangling threads are weak references.

..

.. bpo: 27369
.. date: 9707
.. nonce: LG7U2D
.. section: Tests

In test_pyexpat, avoid testing an error message detail that changed in Expat
2.2.0.

..

.. bpo: 27952
.. date: 9706
.. nonce: WX9Ufc
.. section: Tools/Demos

Get Tools/scripts/fixcid.py working with Python 3 and the current "re"
module, avoid invalid Python backslash escapes, and fix a bug parsing
escaped C quote signs.

..

.. bpo: 27332
.. date: 9705
.. nonce: OuRZp9
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed the type of the first argument of module-level functions generated by
Argument Clinic.  Patch by Petr Viktorin.

..

.. bpo: 27418
.. date: 9704
.. nonce: W2m_8I
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed Tools/importbench/importbench.py.

..

.. bpo: 28251
.. date: 9703
.. nonce: tR_AFs
.. section: Windows

Improvements to help manuals on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 28110
.. date: 9702
.. nonce: cnkP5F
.. section: Windows

launcher.msi has different product codes between 32-bit and 64-bit

..

.. bpo: 25144
.. date: 9701
.. nonce: iUha52
.. section: Windows

Ensures TargetDir is set before continuing with custom install.

..

.. bpo: 27469
.. date: 9700
.. nonce: 0GwDkX
.. section: Windows

Adds a shell extension to the launcher so that drag and drop works
correctly.

..

.. bpo: 27309
.. date: 9699
.. nonce: 4DPjhF
.. section: Windows

Enabled proper Windows styles in python[w].exe manifest.

..

.. bpo: 29080
.. date: 9698
.. nonce: b3qLQT
.. section: Build

Removes hard dependency on hg.exe from PCBuild/build.bat

..

.. bpo: 23903
.. date: 9697
.. nonce: JXJ889
.. section: Build

Added missed names to PC/python3.def.

..

.. bpo: 10656
.. date: 9696
.. nonce: pR8FFU
.. section: Build

Fix out-of-tree building on AIX.  Patch by Tristan Carel and Michael
Haubenwallner.

..

.. bpo: 26359
.. date: 9695
.. nonce: CLz6qy
.. section: Build

Rename --with-optimiations to --enable-optimizations.

..

.. bpo: 28444
.. date: 9694
.. nonce: zkc9nT
.. section: Build

Fix missing extensions modules when cross compiling.

..

.. bpo: 28248
.. date: 9693
.. nonce: KY_-en
.. section: Build

Update Windows build and OS X installers to use OpenSSL 1.0.2j.

..

.. bpo: 28258
.. date: 9692
.. nonce: iKtAHd
.. section: Build

Fixed build with Estonian locale (python-config and distclean targets in
Makefile).  Patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 26661
.. date: 9691
.. nonce: Z_HNbs
.. section: Build

setup.py now detects system libffi with multiarch wrapper.

..

.. bpo: 28066
.. date: 9690
.. nonce: _3xImV
.. section: Build

Fix the logic that searches build directories for generated include files
when building outside the source tree.

..

.. bpo: 15819
.. date: 9689
.. nonce: QVDr3E
.. section: Build

Remove redundant include search directory option for building outside the
source tree.

..

.. bpo: 27566
.. date: 9688
.. nonce: xDWjEb
.. section: Build

Fix clean target in freeze makefile (patch by Lisa Roach)

..

.. bpo: 27705
.. date: 9687
.. nonce: 8C2Ms3
.. section: Build

Update message in validate_ucrtbase.py

..

.. bpo: 27983
.. date: 9686
.. nonce: jL_1n8
.. section: Build

Cause lack of llvm-profdata tool when using clang as required for PGO
linking to be a configure time error rather than make time when --with-
optimizations is enabled.  Also improve our ability to find the llvm-
profdata tool on MacOS and some Linuxes.

..

.. bpo: 26307
.. date: 9685
.. nonce: Puk2rd
.. section: Build

The profile-opt build now applies PGO to the built-in modules.

..

.. bpo: 26359
.. date: 9684
.. nonce: WXBL-Y
.. section: Build

Add the --with-optimizations configure flag.

..

.. bpo: 27713
.. date: 9683
.. nonce: _3DgXG
.. section: Build

Suppress spurious build warnings when updating importlib's bootstrap files.
Patch by Xiang Zhang

..

.. bpo: 25825
.. date: 9682
.. nonce: JD8aRp
.. section: Build

Correct the references to Modules/python.exp and ld_so_aix, which are
required on AIX.  This updates references to an installation path that was
changed in 3.2a4, and undoes changed references to the build tree that were
made in 3.5.0a1.

..

.. bpo: 27453
.. date: 9681
.. nonce: Pb5DBi
.. section: Build

CPP invocation in configure must use CPPFLAGS. Patch by Chi Hsuan Yen.

..

.. bpo: 27641
.. date: 9680
.. nonce: eGzgCk
.. section: Build

The configure script now inserts comments into the makefile to prevent the
pgen and _freeze_importlib executables from being cross- compiled.

..

.. bpo: 26662
.. date: 9679
.. nonce: XkwRxM
.. section: Build

Set PYTHON_FOR_GEN in configure as the Python program to be used for file
generation during the build.

..

.. bpo: 10910
.. date: 9678
.. nonce: ZdRayb
.. section: Build

Avoid C++ compilation errors on FreeBSD and OS X. Also update FreedBSD
version checks for the original ctype UTF-8 workaround.

..

.. bpo: 28676
.. date: 9677
.. nonce: Wxf6Ds
.. section: Build

Prevent missing 'getentropy' declaration warning on macOS. Patch by Gareth
Rees.
