.. bpo: 25630
.. date: 8410
.. nonce: ZxzcoY
.. release date: 2015-11-22
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible segfault during argument parsing in functions that accept
filesystem paths.

..

.. bpo: 23564
.. date: 8409
.. nonce: XHarGG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a partially broken sanity check in the _posixsubprocess internals
regarding how fds_to_pass were passed to the child.  The bug had no actual
impact as subprocess.py already avoided it.

..

.. bpo: 25388
.. date: 8408
.. nonce: zm3uuQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed tokenizer crash when processing undecodable source code with a null
byte.

..

.. bpo: 25462
.. date: 8407
.. nonce: eXDzgO
.. section: Core and Builtins

The hash of the key now is calculated only once in most operations in C
implementation of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 8406
.. nonce: 90kpuP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Default implementation of __reduce__ and __reduce_ex__ now rejects builtin
types with not defined __new__.

..

.. bpo: 25555
.. date: 8405
.. nonce: MUpG-j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix parser and AST: fill lineno and col_offset of "arg" node when compiling
AST from Python objects.

..

.. bpo: 24802
.. date: 8404
.. nonce: Qie066
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid buffer overreads when int(), float(), compile(), exec() and eval() are
passed bytes-like objects.  These objects are not necessarily terminated by
a null byte, but the functions assumed they were.

..

.. bpo: 24726
.. date: 8403
.. nonce: AHk4v2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash and leaking NULL in repr() of OrderedDict that was mutated by
direct calls of dict methods.

..

.. bpo: 25449
.. date: 8402
.. nonce: VqTOFi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Iterating OrderedDict with keys with unstable hash now raises KeyError in C
implementations as well as in Python implementation.

..

.. bpo: 25395
.. date: 8401
.. nonce: htkE3W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash when highly nested OrderedDict structures were garbage
collected.

..

.. bpo: 25274
.. date: 8400
.. nonce: QCGvAF
.. section: Core and Builtins

sys.setrecursionlimit() now raises a RecursionError if the new recursion
limit is too low depending at the current recursion depth. Modify also the
"lower-water mark" formula to make it monotonic. This mark is used to decide
when the overflowed flag of the thread state is reset.

..

.. bpo: 24402
.. date: 8399
.. nonce: MAgi3X
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix input() to prompt to the redirected stdout when sys.stdout.fileno()
fails.

..

.. bpo: 24806
.. date: 8398
.. nonce: Nb0znT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent builtin types that are not allowed to be subclassed from being
subclassed through multiple inheritance.

..

.. bpo: 24848
.. date: 8397
.. nonce: HlUSuy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a number of bugs in UTF-7 decoding of misformed data.

..

.. bpo: 25280
.. date: 8396
.. nonce: ivTMwd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Import trace messages emitted in verbose (-v) mode are no longer formatted
twice.

..

.. bpo: 25003
.. date: 8395
.. nonce: _ban92
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Solaris 11.3 or newer, os.urandom() now uses the getrandom() function
instead of the getentropy() function. The getentropy() function is blocking
to generate very good quality entropy, os.urandom() doesn't need such
high-quality entropy.

..

.. bpo: 25182
.. date: 8394
.. nonce: gBDq-T
.. section: Core and Builtins

The stdprinter (used as sys.stderr before the io module is imported at
startup) now uses the backslashreplace error handler.

..

.. bpo: 25131
.. date: 8393
.. nonce: j5hH6a
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the line number and column offset of set/dict literals and
comprehensions correspond to the opening brace.

..

.. bpo: 25150
.. date: 8392
.. nonce: 0Gh-Ty
.. section: Core and Builtins

Hide the private _Py_atomic_xxx symbols from the public Python.h header to
fix a compilation error with OpenMP. PyThreadState_GET() becomes an alias to
PyThreadState_Get() to avoid ABI incompatibilities.

..

.. bpo: 25626
.. date: 8391
.. nonce: TQ3fvb
.. section: Library

Change three zlib functions to accept sizes that fit in Py_ssize_t, but
internally cap those sizes to UINT_MAX.  This resolves a regression in 3.5
where GzipFile.read() failed to read chunks larger than 2 or 4 GiB.  The
change affects the zlib.Decompress.decompress() max_length parameter, the
zlib.decompress() bufsize parameter, and the zlib.Decompress.flush() length
parameter.

..

.. bpo: 25583
.. date: 8390
.. nonce: Gk-cim
.. section: Library

Avoid incorrect errors raised by os.makedirs(exist_ok=True) when the OS
gives priority to errors such as EACCES over EEXIST.

..

.. bpo: 25593
.. date: 8389
.. nonce: 56uegI
.. section: Library

Change semantics of EventLoop.stop() in asyncio.

..

.. bpo: 6973
.. date: 8388
.. nonce: nl5cHt
.. section: Library

When we know a subprocess.Popen process has died, do not allow the
send_signal(), terminate(), or kill() methods to do anything as they could
potentially signal a different process.

..

.. bpo: 25590
.. date: 8387
.. nonce: aCt-yW
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, only call getattr() once per attribute.

..

.. bpo: 25498
.. date: 8386
.. nonce: AvqEBl
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when garbage-collecting ctypes objects created by wrapping a
memoryview.  This was a regression made in 3.5a1.  Based on patch by
Eryksun.

..

.. bpo: 25584
.. date: 8385
.. nonce: 124mYw
.. section: Library

Added "escape" to the __all__ list in the glob module.

..

.. bpo: 25584
.. date: 8384
.. nonce: ZeWX0J
.. section: Library

Fixed recursive glob() with patterns starting with ``**``.

..

.. bpo: 25446
.. date: 8383
.. nonce: k1DByx
.. section: Library

Fix regression in smtplib's AUTH LOGIN support.

..

.. bpo: 18010
.. date: 8382
.. nonce: Azyf1C
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc web server's module search function to handle exceptions from
importing packages.

..

.. bpo: 25554
.. date: 8381
.. nonce: UM9MlR
.. section: Library

Got rid of circular references in regular expression parsing.

..

.. bpo: 25510
.. date: 8380
.. nonce: 79g7LA
.. section: Library

fileinput.FileInput.readline() now returns b'' instead of '' at the end if
the FileInput was opened with binary mode. Patch by Ryosuke Ito.

..

.. bpo: 25503
.. date: 8379
.. nonce: Zea0Y7
.. section: Library

Fixed inspect.getdoc() for inherited docstrings of properties. Original
patch by John Mark Vandenberg.

..

.. bpo: 25515
.. date: 8378
.. nonce: fQsyYG
.. section: Library

Always use os.urandom as a source of randomness in uuid.uuid4.

..

.. bpo: 21827
.. date: 8377
.. nonce: k2oreR
.. section: Library

Fixed textwrap.dedent() for the case when largest common whitespace is a
substring of smallest leading whitespace. Based on patch by Robert Li.

..

.. bpo: 25447
.. date: 8376
.. nonce: eDYc4t
.. section: Library

The lru_cache() wrapper objects now can be copied and pickled (by returning
the original object unchanged).

..

.. bpo: 25390
.. date: 8375
.. nonce: 6mSgRq
.. section: Library

typing: Don't crash on Union[str, Pattern].

..

.. bpo: 25441
.. date: 8374
.. nonce: d7zph6
.. section: Library

asyncio: Raise error from drain() when socket is closed.

..

.. bpo: 25410
.. date: 8373
.. nonce: QAs_3B
.. section: Library

Cleaned up and fixed minor bugs in C implementation of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 25411
.. date: 8372
.. nonce: qsJTCb
.. section: Library

Improved Unicode support in SMTPHandler through better use of the email
package. Thanks to user simon04 for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 25407
.. date: 8371
.. nonce: ukNt1D
.. section: Library

Remove mentions of the formatter module being removed in Python 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 25406
.. date: 8370
.. nonce: 5MZKU_
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in C implementation of OrderedDict.move_to_end() that caused
segmentation fault or hang in iterating after moving several items to the
start of ordered dict.

..

.. bpo: 25364
.. date: 8369
.. nonce: u_1Wi6
.. section: Library

zipfile now works in threads disabled builds.

..

.. bpo: 25328
.. date: 8368
.. nonce: Rja1Xg
.. section: Library

smtpd's SMTPChannel now correctly raises a ValueError if both decode_data
and enable_SMTPUTF8 are set to true.

..

.. bpo: 25316
.. date: 8367
.. nonce: dHQHWI
.. section: Library

distutils raises OSError instead of DistutilsPlatformError when MSVC is not
installed.

..

.. bpo: 25380
.. date: 8366
.. nonce: sKZ6-I
.. section: Library

Fixed protocol for the STACK_GLOBAL opcode in pickletools.opcodes.

..

.. bpo: 23972
.. date: 8365
.. nonce: s2g30g
.. section: Library

Updates asyncio datagram create method allowing reuseport and reuseaddr
socket options to be set prior to binding the socket. Mirroring the existing
asyncio create_server method the reuseaddr option for datagram sockets
defaults to True if the O/S is 'posix' (except if the platform is Cygwin).
Patch by Chris Laws.

..

.. bpo: 25304
.. date: 8364
.. nonce: CsmLyI
.. section: Library

Add asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe().  This lets you submit a coroutine to
a loop from another thread, returning a concurrent.futures.Future.  By
Vincent Michel.

..

.. bpo: 25232
.. date: 8363
.. nonce: KhKjCE
.. section: Library

Fix CGIRequestHandler to split the query from the URL at the first question
mark (?) rather than the last. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 24657
.. date: 8362
.. nonce: h2Ag7y
.. section: Library

Prevent CGIRequestHandler from collapsing slashes in the query part of the
URL as if it were a path. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 24483
.. date: 8361
.. nonce: WPLGSJ
.. section: Library

C implementation of functools.lru_cache() now calculates key's hash only
once.

..

.. bpo: 22958
.. date: 8360
.. nonce: Ebu7Gl
.. section: Library

Constructor and update method of weakref.WeakValueDictionary now accept the
self and the dict keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 22609
.. date: 8359
.. nonce: fV7hdV
.. section: Library

Constructor of collections.UserDict now accepts the self keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 25111
.. date: 8358
.. nonce: azL4qE
.. section: Library

Fixed comparison of traceback.FrameSummary.

..

.. bpo: 25262
.. date: 8357
.. nonce: pQS5cB
.. section: Library

Added support for BINBYTES8 opcode in Python implementation of unpickler.
Highest 32 bits of 64-bit size for BINUNICODE8 and BINBYTES8 opcodes no
longer silently ignored on 32-bit platforms in C implementation.

..

.. bpo: 25034
.. date: 8356
.. nonce: eGvOIb
.. section: Library

Fix string.Formatter problem with auto-numbering and nested format_specs.
Patch by Anthon van der Neut.

..

.. bpo: 25233
.. date: 8355
.. nonce: EdZV9x
.. section: Library

Rewrite the guts of asyncio.Queue and asyncio.Semaphore to be more
understandable and correct.

..

.. bpo: 25203
.. date: 8354
.. nonce: IgDEbt
.. section: Library

Failed readline.set_completer_delims() no longer left the module in
inconsistent state.

..

.. bpo: 23600
.. date: 8353
.. nonce: 7J_RD5
.. section: Library

Default implementation of tzinfo.fromutc() was returning wrong results in
some cases.

..

.. bpo: 23329
.. date: 8352
.. nonce: yccJBE
.. section: Library

Allow the ssl module to be built with older versions of LibreSSL.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8351
.. nonce: ww9QSm
.. section: Library

Prevent overflow in _Unpickler_Read.

..

.. bpo: 25047
.. date: 8350
.. nonce: kc8tqx
.. section: Library

The XML encoding declaration written by Element Tree now respects the letter
case given by the user. This restores the ability to write encoding names in
uppercase like "UTF-8", which worked in Python 2.

..

.. bpo: 25135
.. date: 8349
.. nonce: gVHNy-
.. section: Library

Make deque_clear() safer by emptying the deque before clearing. This helps
avoid possible reentrancy issues.

..

.. bpo: 19143
.. date: 8348
.. nonce: 76SBSO
.. section: Library

platform module now reads Windows version from kernel32.dll to avoid
compatibility shims.

..

.. bpo: 25092
.. date: 8347
.. nonce: fQ37Ac
.. section: Library

Fix datetime.strftime() failure when errno was already set to EINVAL.

..

.. bpo: 23517
.. date: 8346
.. nonce: 3ABmf1
.. section: Library

Fix rounding in fromtimestamp() and utcfromtimestamp() methods of
datetime.datetime: microseconds are now rounded to nearest with ties going
to nearest even integer (ROUND_HALF_EVEN), instead of being rounding towards
minus infinity (ROUND_FLOOR). It's important that these methods use the same
rounding mode than datetime.timedelta to keep the property:
(datetime(1970,1,1) + timedelta(seconds=t)) == datetime.utcfromtimestamp(t).
It also the rounding mode used by round(float) for example.

..

.. bpo: 25155
.. date: 8345
.. nonce: JiETzD
.. section: Library

Fix datetime.datetime.now() and datetime.datetime.utcnow() on Windows to
support date after year 2038. It was a regression introduced in Python
3.5.0.

..

.. bpo: 25108
.. date: 8344
.. nonce: zGPbgA
.. section: Library

Omitted internal frames in traceback functions print_stack(),
format_stack(), and extract_stack() called without arguments.

..

.. bpo: 25118
.. date: 8343
.. nonce: wGm1u6
.. section: Library

Fix a regression of Python 3.5.0 in os.waitpid() on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 24684
.. date: 8342
.. nonce: t4T77O
.. section: Library

socket.socket.getaddrinfo() now calls PyUnicode_AsEncodedString() instead of
calling the encode() method of the host, to handle correctly custom string
with an encode() method which doesn't return a byte string. The encoder of
the IDNA codec is now called directly instead of calling the encode() method
of the string.

..

.. bpo: 25060
.. date: 8341
.. nonce: zLdvIk
.. section: Library

Correctly compute stack usage of the BUILD_MAP opcode.

..

.. bpo: 24857
.. date: 8340
.. nonce: PpJWZ9
.. section: Library

Comparing call_args to a long sequence now correctly returns a boolean
result instead of raising an exception.  Patch by A Kaptur.

..

.. bpo: 23144
.. date: 8339
.. nonce: cLf67X
.. section: Library

Make sure that HTMLParser.feed() returns all the data, even when
convert_charrefs is True.

..

.. bpo: 24982
.. date: 8338
.. nonce: sGMMAR
.. section: Library

shutil.make_archive() with the "zip" format now adds entries for directories
(including empty directories) in ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 25019
.. date: 8337
.. nonce: JQJlOZ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash caused by setting non-string key of expat parser. Based on
patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 16180
.. date: 8336
.. nonce: 6IUcNS
.. section: Library

Exit pdb if file has syntax error, instead of trapping user in an infinite
loop.  Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 24891
.. date: 8335
.. nonce: ddVmHS
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition at Python startup if the file descriptor of stdin (0),
stdout (1) or stderr (2) is closed while Python is creating sys.stdin,
sys.stdout and sys.stderr objects. These attributes are now set to None if
the creation of the object failed, instead of raising an OSError exception.
Initial patch written by Marco Paolini.

..

.. bpo: 24992
.. date: 8334
.. nonce: 5sqF74
.. section: Library

Fix error handling and a race condition (related to garbage collection) in
collections.OrderedDict constructor.

..

.. bpo: 24881
.. date: 8333
.. nonce: ZoVZXu
.. section: Library

Fixed setting binary mode in Python implementation of FileIO on Windows and
Cygwin.  Patch from Akira Li.

..

.. bpo: 25578
.. date: 8332
.. nonce: G6S-ft
.. section: Library

Fix (another) memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercer().

..

.. bpo: 25530
.. date: 8331
.. nonce: hDFkwu
.. section: Library

Disable the vulnerable SSLv3 protocol by default when creating
ssl.SSLContext.

..

.. bpo: 25569
.. date: 8330
.. nonce: CfvQjK
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercert().

..

.. bpo: 25471
.. date: 8329
.. nonce: T0A02M
.. section: Library

Sockets returned from accept() shouldn't appear to be nonblocking.

..

.. bpo: 25319
.. date: 8328
.. nonce: iyuglv
.. section: Library

When threading.Event is reinitialized, the underlying condition should use a
regular lock rather than a recursive lock.

..

.. bpo: 21112
.. date: 8327
.. nonce: vSFU1r
.. section: Library

Fix regression in unittest.expectedFailure on subclasses. Patch from Berker
Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 24764
.. date: 8326
.. nonce: QwFZ2S
.. section: Library

cgi.FieldStorage.read_multi() now ignores the Content-Length header in part
headers. Patch written by Peter Landry and reviewed by Pierre Quentel.

..

.. bpo: 24913
.. date: 8325
.. nonce: p2ZAJ4
.. section: Library

Fix overrun error in deque.index(). Found by John Leitch and Bryce Darling.

..

.. bpo: 24774
.. date: 8324
.. nonce: xLbskG
.. section: Library

Fix docstring in http.server.test. Patch from Chiu-Hsiang Hsu.

..

.. bpo: 21159
.. date: 8323
.. nonce: ochL5W
.. section: Library

Improve message in configparser.InterpolationMissingOptionError. Patch from
Łukasz Langa.

..

.. bpo: 20362
.. date: 8322
.. nonce: 5aP_Ri
.. section: Library

Honour TestCase.longMessage correctly in assertRegex. Patch from Ilia
Kurenkov.

..

.. bpo: 23572
.. date: 8321
.. nonce: QhQ9RD
.. section: Library

Fixed functools.singledispatch on classes with falsy metaclasses.  Patch by
Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8320
.. nonce: DO1sFa
.. section: Library

asyncio: ensure_future() now accepts awaitable objects.

..

.. bpo: 15348
.. date: 8319
.. nonce: d1Fg01
.. section: IDLE

Stop the debugger engine (normally in a user process) before closing the
debugger window (running in the IDLE process). This prevents the
RuntimeErrors that were being caught and ignored.

..

.. bpo: 24455
.. date: 8318
.. nonce: x6YqtE
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE from hanging when a) closing the shell while the debugger is
active (15347); b) closing the debugger with the [X] button (15348); and c)
activating the debugger when already active (24455). The patch by Mark
Roseman does this by making two changes. 1. Suspend and resume the
gui.interaction method with the tcl vwait mechanism intended for this
purpose (instead of root.mainloop & .quit). 2. In gui.run, allow any
existing interaction to terminate first.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8317
.. nonce: Yp9LRY
.. section: IDLE

Change 'The program' to 'Your program' in an IDLE 'kill program?' message to
make it clearer that the program referred to is the currently running user
program, not IDLE itself.

..

.. bpo: 24750
.. date: 8316
.. nonce: xgsi-K
.. section: IDLE

Improve the appearance of the IDLE editor window status bar. Patch by Mark
Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25313
.. date: 8315
.. nonce: xMXHpO
.. section: IDLE

Change the handling of new built-in text color themes to better address the
compatibility problem introduced by the addition of IDLE Dark. Consistently
use the revised idleConf.CurrentTheme everywhere in idlelib.

..

.. bpo: 24782
.. date: 8314
.. nonce: RgIPYE
.. section: IDLE

Extension configuration is now a tab in the IDLE Preferences dialog rather
than a separate dialog.  The former tabs are now a sorted list.  Patch by
Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 22726
.. date: 8313
.. nonce: x8T0dA
.. section: IDLE

Re-activate the config dialog help button with some content about the other
buttons and the new IDLE Dark theme.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 8312
.. nonce: TFPJhr
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now has an 'IDLE Dark' built-in text color theme. It is more or less
IDLE Classic inverted, with a cobalt blue background. Strings, comments,
keywords, ... are still green, red, orange, ... . To use it with IDLEs
released before November 2015, hit the 'Save as New Custom Theme' button and
enter a new name, such as 'Custom Dark'.  The custom theme will work with
any IDLE release, and can be modified.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 8311
.. nonce: 5Llwo4
.. section: IDLE

README.txt is now an idlelib index for IDLE developers and curious users.
The previous user content is now in the IDLE doc chapter. 'IDLE' now means
'Integrated Development and Learning Environment'.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 8310
.. nonce: ZUz9Fn
.. section: IDLE

Users can now set breakpoint colors in Settings -> Custom Highlighting.
Original patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24972
.. date: 8309
.. nonce: uc0uNo
.. section: IDLE

Inactive selection background now matches active selection background, as
configured by users, on all systems.  Found items are now always highlighted
on Windows.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24570
.. date: 8308
.. nonce: s3EkNn
.. section: IDLE

Idle: make calltip and completion boxes appear on Macs affected by a tk
regression.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24988
.. date: 8307
.. nonce: tXqq4T
.. section: IDLE

Idle ScrolledList context menus (used in debugger) now work on Mac Aqua.
Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24801
.. date: 8306
.. nonce: -bj_Ou
.. section: IDLE

Make right-click for context menu work on Mac Aqua. Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25173
.. date: 8305
.. nonce: EZzrPg
.. section: IDLE

Associate tkinter messageboxes with a specific widget. For Mac OSX, make
them a 'sheet'.  Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25198
.. date: 8304
.. nonce: -j_BV7
.. section: IDLE

Enhance the initial html viewer now used for Idle Help. Properly indent
fixed-pitch text (patch by Mark Roseman). Give code snippet a very
Sphinx-like light blueish-gray background. Re-use initial width and height
set by users for shell and editor. When the Table of Contents (TOC) menu is
used, put the section header at the top of the screen.

..

.. bpo: 25225
.. date: 8303
.. nonce: 9pvdq6
.. section: IDLE

Condense and rewrite Idle doc section on text colors.

..

.. bpo: 21995
.. date: 8302
.. nonce: C5Rmzx
.. section: IDLE

Explain some differences between IDLE and console Python.

..

.. bpo: 22820
.. date: 8301
.. nonce: hix_8X
.. section: IDLE

Explain need for *print* when running file from Idle editor.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 8300
.. nonce: UVMYQq
.. section: IDLE

Doc: augment Idle feature list and no-subprocess section.

..

.. bpo: 25219
.. date: 8299
.. nonce: 8_9DYg
.. section: IDLE

Update doc for Idle command line options. Some were missing and notes were
not correct.

..

.. bpo: 24861
.. date: 8298
.. nonce: Ecg2yT
.. section: IDLE

Most of idlelib is private and subject to change. Use idleib.idle.* to start
Idle. See idlelib.__init__.__doc__.

..

.. bpo: 25199
.. date: 8297
.. nonce: ih7yY3
.. section: IDLE

Idle: add synchronization comments for future maintainers.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 8296
.. nonce: bZtPgJ
.. section: IDLE

Replace help.txt with help.html for Idle doc display. The new
idlelib/help.html is rstripped Doc/build/html/library/idle.html. It looks
better than help.txt and will better document Idle as released. The tkinter
html viewer that works for this file was written by Mark Roseman. The now
unused EditorWindow.HelpDialog class and helt.txt file are deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 24199
.. date: 8295
.. nonce: VKnZEv
.. section: IDLE

Deprecate unused idlelib.idlever with possible removal in 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 24790
.. date: 8294
.. nonce: hD1hlj
.. section: IDLE

Remove extraneous code (which also create 2 & 3 conflicts).

..

.. bpo: 22558
.. date: 8293
.. nonce: Pk02YC
.. section: Documentation

Add remaining doc links to source code for Python-coded modules. Patch by
Yoni Lavi.

..

.. bpo: 12067
.. date: 8292
.. nonce: nLD2M-
.. section: Documentation

Rewrite Comparisons section in the Expressions chapter of the language
reference. Some of the details of comparing mixed types were incorrect or
ambiguous. NotImplemented is only relevant at a lower level than the
Expressions chapter. Added details of comparing range() objects, and default
behaviour and consistency suggestions for user-defined classes. Patch from
Andy Maier.

..

.. bpo: 24952
.. date: 8291
.. nonce: RHhFPE
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the default size argument of stack_size() in the "threading" and
"_thread" modules. Patch from Mattip.

..

.. bpo: 23725
.. date: 8290
.. nonce: 49TZ5f
.. section: Documentation

Overhaul tempfile docs. Note deprecated status of mktemp. Patch from
Zbigniew Jędrzejewski-Szmek.

..

.. bpo: 24808
.. date: 8289
.. nonce: MGjc3F
.. section: Documentation

Update the types of some PyTypeObject fields.  Patch by Joseph Weston.

..

.. bpo: 22812
.. date: 8288
.. nonce: kLCF0G
.. section: Documentation

Fix unittest discovery examples. Patch from Pam McA'Nulty.

..

.. bpo: 25449
.. date: 8287
.. nonce: MP6KNs
.. section: Tests

Added tests for OrderedDict subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 25099
.. date: 8286
.. nonce: tJQOWx
.. section: Tests

Make test_compileall not fail when an entry on sys.path cannot be written to
(commonly seen in administrative installs on Windows).

..

.. bpo: 23919
.. date: 8285
.. nonce: vJnjaq
.. section: Tests

Prevents assert dialogs appearing in the test suite.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8284
.. nonce: X-Bk5l
.. section: Tests

``PCbuild\rt.bat`` now accepts an unlimited number of arguments to pass
along to regrtest.py.  Previously there was a limit of 9.

..

.. bpo: 24915
.. date: 8283
.. nonce: PgD3Cx
.. section: Build

Add LLVM support for PGO builds and use the test suite to generate the
profile data. Initial patch by Alecsandru Patrascu of Intel.

..

.. bpo: 24910
.. date: 8282
.. nonce: ZZdfl0
.. section: Build

Windows MSIs now have unique display names.

..

.. bpo: 24986
.. date: 8281
.. nonce: 1WyXeU
.. section: Build

It is now possible to build Python on Windows without errors when external
libraries are not available.

..

.. bpo: 25450
.. date: 8280
.. nonce: X4xlWf
.. section: Windows

Updates shortcuts to start Python in installation directory.

..

.. bpo: 25164
.. date: 8279
.. nonce: FHVOOA
.. section: Windows

Changes default all-users install directory to match per-user directory.

..

.. bpo: 25143
.. date: 8278
.. nonce: hmxsia
.. section: Windows

Improves installer error messages for unsupported platforms.

..

.. bpo: 25163
.. date: 8277
.. nonce: uCRe8H
.. section: Windows

Display correct directory in installer when using non-default settings.

..

.. bpo: 25361
.. date: 8276
.. nonce: GETaSY
.. section: Windows

Disables use of SSE2 instructions in Windows 32-bit build

..

.. bpo: 25089
.. date: 8275
.. nonce: n_YJgw
.. section: Windows

Adds logging to installer for case where launcher is not selected on
upgrade.

..

.. bpo: 25165
.. date: 8274
.. nonce: aUTN1e
.. section: Windows

Windows uninstallation should not remove launcher if other versions remain

..

.. bpo: 25112
.. date: 8273
.. nonce: frdKij
.. section: Windows

py.exe launcher is missing icons

..

.. bpo: 25102
.. date: 8272
.. nonce: 6y6Akl
.. section: Windows

Windows installer does not precompile for -O or -OO.

..

.. bpo: 25081
.. date: 8271
.. nonce: dcRCTO
.. section: Windows

Makes Back button in installer go back to upgrade page when upgrading.

..

.. bpo: 25091
.. date: 8270
.. nonce: 1u-VKy
.. section: Windows

Increases font size of the installer.

..

.. bpo: 25126
.. date: 8269
.. nonce: ANx3DW
.. section: Windows

Clarifies that the non-web installer will download some components.

..

.. bpo: 25213
.. date: 8268
.. nonce: KGmXoe
.. section: Windows

Restores requestedExecutionLevel to manifest to disable UAC virtualization.

..

.. bpo: 25022
.. date: 8267
.. nonce: vAt_zr
.. section: Windows

Removed very outdated PC/example_nt/ directory.

..

.. bpo: 25440
.. date: 8266
.. nonce: 5xhyGr
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix output of python-config --extension-suffix.
