.. bpo: 23571
.. date: 7950
.. nonce: GTkAkq
.. release date: 2015-03-09
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyObject_Call() and PyCFunction_Call() now raise a SystemError if a function
returns a result and raises an exception. The SystemError is chained to the
previous exception.

..

.. bpo: 22524
.. date: 7949
.. nonce: Ks6_2x
.. section: Library

New os.scandir() function, part of the PEP 471: "os.scandir() function -- a
better and faster directory iterator". Patch written by Ben Hoyt.

..

.. bpo: 23103
.. date: 7948
.. nonce: I3RLIV
.. section: Library

Reduced the memory consumption of IPv4Address and IPv6Address.

..

.. bpo: 21793
.. date: 7947
.. nonce: GQtYMM
.. section: Library

BaseHTTPRequestHandler again logs response code as numeric, not as
stringified enum.  Patch by Demian Brecht.

..

.. bpo: 23476
.. date: 7946
.. nonce: 82QV9I
.. section: Library

In the ssl module, enable OpenSSL's X509_V_FLAG_TRUSTED_FIRST flag on
certificate stores when it is available.

..

.. bpo: 23576
.. date: 7945
.. nonce: 98F-PP
.. section: Library

Avoid stalling in SSL reads when EOF has been reached in the SSL layer but
the underlying connection hasn't been closed.

..

.. bpo: 23504
.. date: 7944
.. nonce: o31h5I
.. section: Library

Added an __all__ to the types module.

..

.. bpo: 23563
.. date: 7943
.. nonce: iQB-ba
.. section: Library

Optimized utility functions in urllib.parse.

..

.. bpo: 7830
.. date: 7942
.. nonce: irvPdC
.. section: Library

Flatten nested functools.partial.

..

.. bpo: 20204
.. date: 7941
.. nonce: DorA4b
.. section: Library

Added the __module__ attribute to _tkinter classes.

..

.. bpo: 19980
.. date: 7940
.. nonce: whwzL_
.. section: Library

Improved help() for non-recognized strings.  help('') now shows the help on
str.  help('help') now shows the help on help(). Original patch by Mark
Lawrence.

..

.. bpo: 23521
.. date: 7939
.. nonce: HvwFfd
.. section: Library

Corrected pure python implementation of timedelta division.

Eliminated OverflowError from ``timedelta * float`` for some floats;
Corrected rounding in timedelta true division.

..

.. bpo: 21619
.. date: 7938
.. nonce: uL0SZh
.. section: Library

Popen objects no longer leave a zombie after exit in the with statement if
the pipe was broken.  Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 22936
.. date: 7937
.. nonce: JrhGYd
.. section: Library

Make it possible to show local variables in tracebacks for both the
traceback module and unittest.

..

.. bpo: 15955
.. date: 7936
.. nonce: _8nYPy
.. section: Library

Add an option to limit the output size in bz2.decompress(). Patch by
Nikolaus Rath.

..

.. bpo: 6639
.. date: 7935
.. nonce: rmjUmG
.. section: Library

Module-level turtle functions no longer raise TclError after closing the
window.

..

.. bpo: 814253
.. date: 7934
.. nonce: icZb-I
.. section: Library

Group references and conditional group references now work in lookbehind
assertions in regular expressions. (See also: bpo-9179)

..

.. bpo: 23215
.. date: 7933
.. nonce: VHVSVX
.. section: Library

Multibyte codecs with custom error handlers that ignores errors consumed too
much memory and raised SystemError or MemoryError. Original patch by Aleksi
Torhamo.

..

.. bpo: 5700
.. date: 7932
.. nonce: iA5yzL
.. section: Library

io.FileIO() called flush() after closing the file. flush() was not called in
close() if closefd=False.

..

.. bpo: 23374
.. date: 7931
.. nonce: 8A9LuZ
.. section: Library

Fixed pydoc failure with non-ASCII files when stdout encoding differs from
file system encoding (e.g. on Mac OS).

..

.. bpo: 23481
.. date: 7930
.. nonce: ZWwliG
.. section: Library

Remove RC4 from the SSL module's default cipher list.

..

.. bpo: 21548
.. date: 7929
.. nonce: CmO_Yh
.. section: Library

Fix pydoc.synopsis() and pydoc.apropos() on modules with empty docstrings.

..

.. bpo: 22885
.. date: 7928
.. nonce: p8FnYk
.. section: Library

Fixed arbitrary code execution vulnerability in the dbm.dumb module.
Original patch by Claudiu Popa.

..

.. bpo: 23239
.. date: 7927
.. nonce: PGUq7T
.. section: Library

ssl.match_hostname() now supports matching of IP addresses.

..

.. bpo: 23146
.. date: 7926
.. nonce: PW-O3u
.. section: Library

Fix mishandling of absolute Windows paths with forward slashes in pathlib.

..

.. bpo: 23096
.. date: 7925
.. nonce: Ftrmf3
.. section: Library

Pickle representation of floats with protocol 0 now is the same for both
Python and C implementations.

..

.. bpo: 19105
.. date: 7924
.. nonce: ZK07Ff
.. section: Library

pprint now more efficiently uses free space at the right.

..

.. bpo: 14910
.. date: 7923
.. nonce: zueIhP
.. section: Library

Add allow_abbrev parameter to argparse.ArgumentParser. Patch by Jonathan
Paugh, Steven Bethard, paul j3 and Daniel Eriksson.

..

.. bpo: 21717
.. date: 7922
.. nonce: Knut81
.. section: Library

tarfile.open() now supports 'x' (exclusive creation) mode.

..

.. bpo: 23344
.. date: 7921
.. nonce: ieu8C1
.. section: Library

marshal.dumps() is now 20-25% faster on average.

..

.. bpo: 20416
.. date: 7920
.. nonce: cwEgkL
.. section: Library

marshal.dumps() with protocols 3 and 4 is now 40-50% faster on average.

..

.. bpo: 23421
.. date: 7919
.. nonce: eckzoV
.. section: Library

Fixed compression in tarfile CLI.  Patch by wdv4758h.

..

.. bpo: 23367
.. date: 7918
.. nonce: kHnFiz
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflows in the unicodedata module.

..

.. bpo: 23361
.. date: 7917
.. nonce: I_w0-z
.. section: Library

Fix possible overflow in Windows subprocess creation code.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 7916
.. nonce: sfmjTs
.. section: Library

logging.handlers.QueueListener now takes a respect_handler_level keyword
argument which, if set to True, will pass messages to handlers taking
handler levels into account.

..

.. bpo: 19705
.. date: 7915
.. nonce: WLzTRV
.. section: Library

turtledemo now has a visual sorting algorithm demo.  Original patch from
Jason Yeo.

..

.. bpo: 23801
.. date: 7914
.. nonce: jyJK3z
.. section: Library

Fix issue where cgi.FieldStorage did not always ignore the entire preamble
to a multipart body.

..

.. bpo: 23445
.. date: 7913
.. nonce: 7fmkYO
.. section: Build

pydebug builds now use "gcc -Og" where possible, to make the resulting
executable faster.

..

.. bpo: 23686
.. date: 7912
.. nonce: B7jDXY
.. section: Build

Update OS X 10.5 installer build to use OpenSSL 1.0.2a.

..

.. bpo: 20204
.. date: 7911
.. nonce: M_jcNK
.. section: C API

Deprecation warning is now raised for builtin types without the __module__
attribute.

..

.. bpo: 23465
.. date: 7910
.. nonce: qBauCy
.. section: Windows

Implement PEP 486 - Make the Python Launcher aware of virtual environments.
Patch by Paul Moore.

..

.. bpo: 23437
.. date: 7909
.. nonce: ro9X8r
.. section: Windows

Make user scripts directory versioned on Windows. Patch by Paul Moore.
