.. bpo: 35907
.. date: 2019-05-21-23-20-18
.. nonce: NC_zNK
.. release date: 2019-06-18
.. section: Security

CVE-2019-9948: Avoid file reading by disallowing ``local-file://`` and
``local_file://`` URL schemes in ``URLopener().open()`` and
``URLopener().retrieve()`` of :mod:`urllib.request`.

..

.. bpo: 36742
.. date: 2019-04-29-15-34-59
.. nonce: QCUY0i
.. section: Security

Fixes mishandling of pre-normalization characters in urlsplit().

..

.. bpo: 30458
.. date: 2019-04-10-08-53-30
.. nonce: 51E-DA
.. section: Security

Address CVE-2019-9740 by disallowing URL paths with embedded whitespace or
control characters through into the underlying http client request.  Such
potentially malicious header injection URLs now cause an
http.client.InvalidURL exception to be raised.

..

.. bpo: 36216
.. date: 2019-03-06-09-38-40
.. nonce: 6q1m4a
.. section: Security

Changes urlsplit() to raise ValueError when the URL contains characters that
decompose under IDNA encoding (NFKC-normalization) into characters that
affect how the URL is parsed.

..

.. bpo: 33529
.. date: 2019-02-24-18-48-16
.. nonce: wpNNBD
.. section: Security

Prevent fold function used in email header encoding from entering infinite
loop when there are too many non-ASCII characters in a header.

..

.. bpo: 35746
.. date: 2019-01-15-18-16-05
.. nonce: nMSd0j
.. section: Security

[CVE-2019-5010] Fix a NULL pointer deref in ssl module. The cert parser did
not handle CRL distribution points with empty DP or URI correctly. A
malicious or buggy certificate can result into segfault. Vulnerability
(TALOS-2018-0758) reported by Colin Read and Nicolas Edet of Cisco.

..

.. bpo: 35121
.. date: 2018-10-31-15-39-17
.. nonce: EgHv9k
.. section: Security

Don't send cookies of domain A without Domain attribute to domain B when
domain A is a suffix match of domain B while using a cookiejar with
:class:`http.cookiejar.DefaultCookiePolicy` policy. Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35643
.. date: 2019-01-02-20-04-49
.. nonce: DaMiaV
.. section: Library

Fixed a SyntaxWarning: invalid escape sequence in Modules/_sha3/cleanup.py.
Patch by Mickaël Schoentgen.

..

.. bpo: 35121
.. date: 2018-12-30-14-35-19
.. nonce: oWmiGU
.. section: Library

Don't set cookie for a request when the request path is a prefix match of
the cookie's path attribute but doesn't end with "/". Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35605
.. date: 2018-12-30-09-56-13
.. nonce: gAWt32
.. section: Documentation

Fix documentation build for sphinx<1.6.  Patch by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 35564
.. date: 2018-12-22-22-52-05
.. nonce: TuEU_D
.. section: Documentation

Explicitly set master_doc variable in conf.py for compliance with Sphinx 2.0

..

.. bpo: 36816
.. date: 2019-05-08-15-55-46
.. nonce: WBKRGZ
.. section: Tests

Update Lib/test/selfsigned_pythontestdotnet.pem to match
self-signed.pythontest.net's new TLS certificate.

..

.. bpo: 35925
.. date: 2019-05-06-18-29-54
.. nonce: gwQPuC
.. section: Tests

Skip specific nntplib and ssl networking tests when they would otherwise
fail due to a modern OS or distro with a default OpenSSL policy of rejecting
connections to servers with weak certificates or disabling TLS below
TLSv1.2.

..

.. bpo: 27313
.. date: 2019-02-24-01-58-38
.. nonce: Sj9veH
.. section: Tests

Avoid test_ttk_guionly ComboboxTest failure with macOS Cocoa Tk.

..

.. bpo: 32947
.. date: 2019-01-18-17-46-10
.. nonce: Hk0KnM
.. section: Tests

test_ssl fixes for TLS 1.3 and OpenSSL 1.1.1.

..

.. bpo: 34602
.. date: 2019-04-29-10-54-14
.. nonce: Lrl2zU
.. section: macOS

Avoid failures setting macOS stack resource limit with resource.setrlimit.
This reverts an earlier fix for bpo-18075 which forced a non-default stack
size when building the interpreter executable on macOS.
