.. bpo: 23722
.. date: 9319
.. nonce: C-8boi
.. release date: 2016-09-12
.. section: Core and Builtins

The __class__ cell used by zero-argument super() is now initialized from
type.__new__ rather than __build_class__, so class methods relying on that
will now work correctly when called from metaclass methods during class
creation. Patch by Martin Teichmann.

..

.. bpo: 25221
.. date: 9318
.. nonce: 9YbOxB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix corrupted result from PyLong_FromLong(0) when Python is compiled with
NSMALLPOSINTS = 0.

..

.. bpo: 27080
.. date: 9317
.. nonce: Te4Tjb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement formatting support for PEP 515.  Initial patch by Chris Angelico.

..

.. bpo: 27199
.. date: 9316
.. nonce: GheADD
.. section: Core and Builtins

In tarfile, expose copyfileobj bufsize to improve throughput. Patch by Jason
Fried.

..

.. bpo: 27948
.. date: 9315
.. nonce: Rpw5nq
.. section: Core and Builtins

In f-strings, only allow backslashes inside the braces (where the
expressions are).  This is a breaking change from the 3.6 alpha releases,
where backslashes are allowed anywhere in an f-string.  Also, require that
expressions inside f-strings be enclosed within literal braces, and not
escapes like ``f'\x7b"hi"\x7d'``.

..

.. bpo: 28046
.. date: 9314
.. nonce: liHxFW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove platform-specific directories from sys.path.

..

.. bpo: 28071
.. date: 9313
.. nonce: PffE44
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add early-out for differencing from an empty set.

..

.. bpo: 25758
.. date: 9312
.. nonce: yR-YTD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevents zipimport from unnecessarily encoding a filename (patch by Eryk
Sun)

..

.. bpo: 25856
.. date: 9311
.. nonce: neCvXl
.. section: Core and Builtins

The __module__ attribute of extension classes and functions now is interned.
This leads to more compact pickle data with protocol 4.

..

.. bpo: 27213
.. date: 9310
.. nonce: VCfkkp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Rework CALL_FUNCTION* opcodes to produce shorter and more efficient
bytecode. Patch by Demur Rumed, design by Serhiy Storchaka, reviewed by
Serhiy Storchaka and Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 26331
.. date: 9309
.. nonce: TdJp8_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement tokenizing support for PEP 515. Patch by Georg Brandl.

..

.. bpo: 27999
.. date: 9308
.. nonce: 8aacQj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make "global after use" a SyntaxError, and ditto for nonlocal. Patch by Ivan
Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 28003
.. date: 9307
.. nonce: noeoav
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 525 -- Asynchronous Generators.

..

.. bpo: 27985
.. date: 9306
.. nonce: 0ayJ5k
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 526 -- Syntax for Variable Annotations. Patch by Ivan
Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 26058
.. date: 9305
.. nonce: UR_ojv
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new private version to the builtin dict type, incremented at each
dictionary creation and at each dictionary change. Implementation of the PEP
509.

..

.. bpo: 27364
.. date: 9304
.. nonce: 8u_LoD
.. section: Core and Builtins

A backslash-character pair that is not a valid escape sequence now generates
a DeprecationWarning.  Patch by Emanuel Barry.

..

.. bpo: 27350
.. date: 9303
.. nonce: aABzcL
.. section: Core and Builtins

`dict` implementation is changed like PyPy. It is more compact and preserves
insertion order. (Concept developed by Raymond Hettinger and patch by Inada
Naoki.)

..

.. bpo: 27911
.. date: 9302
.. nonce: 1eaHRd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Remove unnecessary error checks in ``exec_builtin_or_dynamic()``.

..

.. bpo: 27078
.. date: 9301
.. nonce: ZevPQR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added BUILD_STRING opcode.  Optimized f-strings evaluation.

..

.. bpo: 17884
.. date: 9300
.. nonce: wGy0dr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python now requires systems with inttypes.h and stdint.h

..

.. bpo: 27961
.. date: 9299
.. nonce: EYS8oe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Require platforms to support ``long long``. Python hasn't compiled without
``long long`` for years, so this is basically a formality.

..

.. bpo: 27355
.. date: 9298
.. nonce: qdIpxm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Removed support for Windows CE.  It was never finished, and Windows CE is no
longer a relevant platform for Python.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9297
.. nonce: rdhhVw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 523.

..

.. bpo: 27870
.. date: 9296
.. nonce: Y0u34u
.. section: Core and Builtins

A left shift of zero by a large integer no longer attempts to allocate large
amounts of memory.

..

.. bpo: 25402
.. date: 9295
.. nonce: naeRHq
.. section: Core and Builtins

In int-to-decimal-string conversion, improve the estimate of the
intermediate memory required, and remove an unnecessarily strict overflow
check. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 27214
.. date: 9294
.. nonce: CDh8S4
.. section: Core and Builtins

In long_invert, be more careful about modifying object returned by long_add,
and remove an unnecessary check for small longs. Thanks Oren Milman for
analysis and patch.

..

.. bpo: 27506
.. date: 9293
.. nonce: eK87PI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Support passing the bytes/bytearray.translate() "delete" argument by
keyword.

..

.. bpo: 27812
.. date: 9292
.. nonce: sidcs8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Properly clear out a generator's frame's backreference to the generator to
prevent crashes in frame.clear().

..

.. bpo: 27811
.. date: 9291
.. nonce: T4AuBo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when a coroutine that has not been awaited is finalized with
warnings-as-errors enabled.

..

.. bpo: 27587
.. date: 9290
.. nonce: mbavY2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix another issue found by PVS-Studio: Null pointer check after use of 'def'
in _PyState_AddModule(). Initial patch by Christian Heimes.

..

.. bpo: 27792
.. date: 9289
.. nonce: Np6_Hl
.. section: Core and Builtins

The modulo operation applied to ``bool`` and other ``int`` subclasses now
always returns an ``int``. Previously the return type depended on the input
values. Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26984
.. date: 9288
.. nonce: 7--80J
.. section: Core and Builtins

int() now always returns an instance of exact int.

..

.. bpo: 25604
.. date: 9287
.. nonce: UkeHGy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a minor bug in integer true division; this bug could potentially have
caused off-by-one-ulp results on platforms with unreliable ldexp
implementations.

..

.. bpo: 24254
.. date: 9286
.. nonce: 368r1U
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make class definition namespace ordered by default.

..

.. bpo: 27662
.. date: 9285
.. nonce: a8cBpq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an overflow check in ``List_New``: the original code was checking
against ``Py_SIZE_MAX`` instead of the correct upper bound of
``Py_SSIZE_T_MAX``. Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27782
.. date: 9284
.. nonce: C8OBQD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Multi-phase extension module import now correctly allows the ``m_methods``
field to be used to add module level functions to instances of non-module
types returned from ``Py_create_mod``. Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27936
.. date: 9283
.. nonce: AdOann
.. section: Core and Builtins

The round() function accepted a second None argument for some types but not
for others.  Fixed the inconsistency by accepting None for all numeric
types.

..

.. bpo: 27487
.. date: 9282
.. nonce: jeTQNr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Warn if a submodule argument to "python -m" or runpy.run_module() is found
in sys.modules after parent packages are imported, but before the submodule
is executed.

..

.. bpo: 27157
.. date: 9281
.. nonce: Wf_eFE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make only type() itself accept the one-argument form. Patch by Eryk Sun and
Emanuel Barry.

..

.. bpo: 27558
.. date: 9280
.. nonce: VmltMh
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a SystemError in the implementation of "raise" statement. In a brand new
thread, raise a RuntimeError since there is no active exception to reraise.
Patch written by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 28008
.. date: 9279
.. nonce: 0DdIrA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement PEP 530 -- asynchronous comprehensions.

..

.. bpo: 27942
.. date: 9278
.. nonce: wCAkW5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix memory leak in codeobject.c

..

.. bpo: 28732
.. date: 9277
.. nonce: xkG8k7
.. section: Library

Fix crash in os.spawnv() with no elements in args

..

.. bpo: 28485
.. date: 9276
.. nonce: WuKqKh
.. section: Library

Always raise ValueError for negative compileall.compile_dir(workers=...)
parameter, even when multithreading is unavailable.

..

.. bpo: 28037
.. date: 9275
.. nonce: -3u7zq
.. section: Library

Use sqlite3_get_autocommit() instead of setting Connection->inTransaction
manually.

..

.. bpo: 25283
.. date: 9274
.. nonce: qwQDX2
.. section: Library

Attributes tm_gmtoff and tm_zone are now available on all platforms in the
return values of time.localtime() and time.gmtime().

..

.. bpo: 24454
.. date: 9273
.. nonce: pUTKOA
.. section: Library

Regular expression match object groups are now accessible using __getitem__.
"mo[x]" is equivalent to "mo.group(x)".

..

.. bpo: 10740
.. date: 9272
.. nonce: 8iGFan
.. section: Library

sqlite3 no longer implicitly commit an open transaction before DDL
statements.

..

.. bpo: 17941
.. date: 9271
.. nonce: E9rm_o
.. section: Library

Add a *module* parameter to collections.namedtuple().

..

.. bpo: 22493
.. date: 9270
.. nonce: yDfUrj
.. section: Library

Inline flags now should be used only at the start of the regular expression.
Deprecation warning is emitted if uses them in the middle of the regular
expression.

..

.. bpo: 26885
.. date: 9269
.. nonce: TJ779X
.. section: Library

xmlrpc now supports unmarshalling additional data types used by Apache
XML-RPC implementation for numerics and None.

..

.. bpo: 28070
.. date: 9268
.. nonce: Kot8Hu
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing inline verbose flag in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 19500
.. date: 9267
.. nonce: H7q5im
.. section: Library

Add client-side SSL session resumption to the ssl module.

..

.. bpo: 28022
.. date: 9266
.. nonce: 08kTMg
.. section: Library

Deprecate ssl-related arguments in favor of SSLContext. The deprecation
include manual creation of SSLSocket and certfile/keyfile (or similar) in
ftplib, httplib, imaplib, smtplib, poplib and urllib.

..

.. bpo: 28043
.. date: 9265
.. nonce: 588Oy3
.. section: Library

SSLContext has improved default settings: OP_NO_SSLv2, OP_NO_SSLv3,
OP_NO_COMPRESSION, OP_CIPHER_SERVER_PREFERENCE, OP_SINGLE_DH_USE,
OP_SINGLE_ECDH_USE and HIGH ciphers without MD5.

..

.. bpo: 24693
.. date: 9264
.. nonce: a63Shp
.. section: Library

Changed some RuntimeError's in the zipfile module to more appropriate types.
Improved some error messages and debugging output.

..

.. bpo: 17909
.. date: 9263
.. nonce: SMNkt6
.. section: Library

``json.load`` and ``json.loads`` now support binary input encoded as UTF-8,
UTF-16 or UTF-32. Patch by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 27137
.. date: 9262
.. nonce: frjG8W
.. section: Library

the pure Python fallback implementation of ``functools.partial`` now matches
the behaviour of its accelerated C counterpart for subclassing, pickling and
text representation purposes. Patch by Emanuel Barry and Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9261
.. nonce: 81jNns
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflows and crashes in the mmap module with unusual
usage patterns.

..

.. bpo: 1703178
.. date: 9260
.. nonce: meb49K
.. section: Library

Fix the ability to pass the --link-objects option to the distutils build_ext
command.

..

.. bpo: 28019
.. date: 9259
.. nonce: KUhBaS
.. section: Library

itertools.count() no longer rounds non-integer step in range between 1.0 and
2.0 to 1.

..

.. bpo: 18401
.. date: 9258
.. nonce: _12WDV
.. section: Library

Pdb now supports the 'readrc' keyword argument to control whether .pdbrc
files should be read.  Patch by Martin Matusiak and Sam Kimbrel.

..

.. bpo: 25969
.. date: 9257
.. nonce: qSPkl-
.. section: Library

Update the lib2to3 grammar to handle the unpacking generalizations added in
3.5.

..

.. bpo: 14977
.. date: 9256
.. nonce: 4MvALg
.. section: Library

mailcap now respects the order of the lines in the mailcap files ("first
match"), as required by RFC 1542.  Patch by Michael Lazar.

..

.. bpo: 28082
.. date: 9255
.. nonce: EICw4d
.. section: Library

Convert re flag constants to IntFlag.

..

.. bpo: 28025
.. date: 9254
.. nonce: YxcZHY
.. section: Library

Convert all ssl module constants to IntEnum and IntFlags. SSLContext
properties now return flags and enums.

..

.. bpo: 23591
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: 7gSXAN
.. section: Library

Add Flag, IntFlag, and auto() to enum module.

..

.. bpo: 433028
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: yGjT0q
.. section: Library

Added support of modifier spans in regular expressions.

..

.. bpo: 24594
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: 9CnFVS
.. section: Library

Validates persist parameter when opening MSI database

..

.. bpo: 17582
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: MXEHxQ
.. section: Library

xml.etree.ElementTree nows preserves whitespaces in attributes (Patch by
Duane Griffin.  Reviewed and approved by Stefan Behnel.)

..

.. bpo: 28047
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: pDu3Fm
.. section: Library

Fixed calculation of line length used for the base64 CTE in the new email
policies.

..

.. bpo: 27576
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: tqZxYv
.. section: Library

Fix call order in OrderedDict.__init__().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: cxHuUo
.. section: Library

email.generator.DecodedGenerator now supports the policy keyword.

..

.. bpo: 28027
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: v39s1z
.. section: Library

Remove undocumented modules from ``Lib/plat-*``: IN, CDROM, DLFCN, TYPES,
CDIO, and STROPTS.

..

.. bpo: 27445
.. date: 9245
.. nonce: wOG0C0
.. section: Library

Don't pass str(_charset) to MIMEText.set_payload(). Patch by Claude Paroz.

..

.. bpo: 24277
.. date: 9244
.. nonce: OgDA28
.. section: Library

The new email API is no longer provisional, and the docs have been
reorganized and rewritten to emphasize the new API.

..

.. bpo: 22450
.. date: 9243
.. nonce: T3Sn_J
.. section: Library

urllib now includes an ``Accept: */*`` header among the default headers.
This makes the results of REST API requests more consistent and predictable
especially when proxy servers are involved.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9242
.. nonce: PVZStR
.. section: Library

lib2to3.pgen3.driver.load_grammar() now creates a stable cache file between
runs given the same Grammar.txt input regardless of the hash randomization
setting.

..

.. bpo: 28005
.. date: 9241
.. nonce: oJLK1w
.. section: Library

Allow ImportErrors in encoding implementation to propagate.

..

.. bpo: 26667
.. date: 9240
.. nonce: hWs9wA
.. section: Library

Support path-like objects in importlib.util.

..

.. bpo: 27570
.. date: 9239
.. nonce: pU0Zie
.. section: Library

Avoid zero-length memcpy() etc calls with null source pointers in the
"ctypes" and "array" modules.

..

.. bpo: 22233
.. date: 9238
.. nonce: uXSN0R
.. section: Library

Break email header lines *only* on the RFC specified CR and LF characters,
not on arbitrary unicode line breaks.  This also fixes a bug in HTTP header
parsing.

..

.. bpo: 27331
.. date: 9237
.. nonce: akOxfh
.. section: Library

The email.mime classes now all accept an optional policy keyword.

..

.. bpo: 27988
.. date: 9236
.. nonce: VfMzZH
.. section: Library

Fix email iter_attachments incorrect mutation of payload list.

..

.. bpo: 16113
.. date: 9235
.. nonce: jyKRxs
.. section: Library

Add SHA-3 and SHAKE support to hashlib module.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9234
.. nonce: j7npJi
.. section: Library

Eliminate a tautological-pointer-compare warning in _scproxy.c.

..

.. bpo: 27776
.. date: 9233
.. nonce: dOJcUU
.. section: Library

The :func:`os.urandom` function does now block on Linux 3.17 and newer until
the system urandom entropy pool is initialized to increase the security.
This change is part of the :pep:`524`.

..

.. bpo: 27778
.. date: 9232
.. nonce: gvbf3F
.. section: Library

Expose the Linux ``getrandom()`` syscall as a new :func:`os.getrandom`
function. This change is part of the :pep:`524`.

..

.. bpo: 27691
.. date: 9231
.. nonce: TMYF5_
.. section: Library

Fix ssl module's parsing of GEN_RID subject alternative name fields in X.509
certs.

..

.. bpo: 18844
.. date: 9230
.. nonce: OZnLOi
.. section: Library

Add random.choices().

..

.. bpo: 25761
.. date: 9229
.. nonce: qd--Ta
.. section: Library

Improved error reporting about truncated pickle data in C implementation of
unpickler.  UnpicklingError is now raised instead of AttributeError and
ValueError in some cases.

..

.. bpo: 26798
.. date: 9228
.. nonce: he58yl
.. section: Library

Add BLAKE2 (blake2b and blake2s) to hashlib.

..

.. bpo: 26032
.. date: 9227
.. nonce: v5ByZW
.. section: Library

Optimized globbing in pathlib by using os.scandir(); it is now about 1.5--4
times faster.

..

.. bpo: 25596
.. date: 9226
.. nonce: TFtyjC
.. section: Library

Optimized glob() and iglob() functions in the glob module; they are now
about 3--6 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 27928
.. date: 9225
.. nonce: vG2f6q
.. section: Library

Add scrypt (password-based key derivation function) to hashlib module
(requires OpenSSL 1.1.0).

..

.. bpo: 27850
.. date: 9224
.. nonce: kIVQ0m
.. section: Library

Remove 3DES from ssl module's default cipher list to counter measure sweet32
attack (CVE-2016-2183).

..

.. bpo: 27766
.. date: 9223
.. nonce: WI70Tc
.. section: Library

Add ChaCha20 Poly1305 to ssl module's default ciper list. (Required OpenSSL
1.1.0 or LibreSSL).

..

.. bpo: 25387
.. date: 9222
.. nonce: -wsV59
.. section: Library

Check return value of winsound.MessageBeep.

..

.. bpo: 27866
.. date: 9221
.. nonce: FM3-BZ
.. section: Library

Add SSLContext.get_ciphers() method to get a list of all enabled ciphers.

..

.. bpo: 27744
.. date: 9220
.. nonce: 2cVMpG
.. section: Library

Add AF_ALG (Linux Kernel crypto) to socket module.

..

.. bpo: 26470
.. date: 9219
.. nonce: QGu_wo
.. section: Library

Port ssl and hashlib module to OpenSSL 1.1.0.

..

.. bpo: 11620
.. date: 9218
.. nonce: JyL-Po
.. section: Library

Fix support for SND_MEMORY in winsound.PlaySound.  Based on a patch by Tim
Lesher.

..

.. bpo: 11734
.. date: 9217
.. nonce: AQoy-q
.. section: Library

Add support for IEEE 754 half-precision floats to the struct module. Based
on a patch by Eli Stevens.

..

.. bpo: 27919
.. date: 9216
.. nonce: NRqNEW
.. section: Library

Deprecated ``extra_path`` distribution option in distutils packaging.

..

.. bpo: 23229
.. date: 9215
.. nonce: gXhSFh
.. section: Library

Add new ``cmath`` constants: ``cmath.inf`` and ``cmath.nan`` to match
``math.inf`` and ``math.nan``, and also ``cmath.infj`` and ``cmath.nanj`` to
match the format used by complex repr.

..

.. bpo: 27842
.. date: 9214
.. nonce: qlhp0-
.. section: Library

The csv.DictReader now returns rows of type OrderedDict. (Contributed by
Steve Holden.)

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9213
.. nonce: 6TjEgz
.. section: Library

Remove support for passing a file descriptor to os.access. It never worked
but previously didn't raise.

..

.. bpo: 12885
.. date: 9212
.. nonce: r-IV1g
.. section: Library

Fix error when distutils encounters symlink.

..

.. bpo: 27881
.. date: 9211
.. nonce: fkETd9
.. section: Library

Fixed possible bugs when setting sqlite3.Connection.isolation_level. Based
on patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27861
.. date: 9210
.. nonce: DBYuo9
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in sqlite3.Connection.cursor() when a factory creates not a
cursor.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 19884
.. date: 9209
.. nonce: MO8AWH
.. section: Library

Avoid spurious output on OS X with Gnu Readline.

..

.. bpo: 27706
.. date: 9208
.. nonce: ZY67yu
.. section: Library

Restore deterministic behavior of random.Random().seed() for string seeds
using seeding version 1.  Allows sequences of calls to random() to exactly
match those obtained in Python 2. Patch by Nofar Schnider.

..

.. bpo: 10513
.. date: 9207
.. nonce: tQIQD_
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in Connection.commit().  Statements should not be reset
after a commit.

..

.. bpo: 12319
.. date: 9206
.. nonce: Wc4oUu
.. section: Library

Chunked transfer encoding support added to http.client.HTTPConnection
requests.  The urllib.request.AbstractHTTPHandler class does not enforce a
Content-Length header any more.  If a HTTP request has a file or iterable
body, but no Content-Length header, the library now falls back to use
chunked transfer- encoding.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9205
.. nonce: cYraeH
.. section: Library

A new version of typing.py from https://github.com/python/typing: -
Collection (only for 3.6) (Issue #27598) - Add FrozenSet to __all__
(upstream #261) - fix crash in _get_type_vars() (upstream #259) - Remove the
dict constraint in ForwardRef._eval_type (upstream #252)

..

.. bpo: 27832
.. date: 9204
.. nonce: hxh6_h
.. section: Library

Make ``_normalize`` parameter to ``Fraction`` constuctor keyword-only, so
that ``Fraction(2, 3, 4)`` now raises ``TypeError``.

..

.. bpo: 27539
.. date: 9203
.. nonce: S4L1cq
.. section: Library

Fix unnormalised ``Fraction.__pow__`` result in the case of negative
exponent and negative base.

..

.. bpo: 21718
.. date: 9202
.. nonce: FUJd-7
.. section: Library

cursor.description is now available for queries using CTEs.

..

.. bpo: 27819
.. date: 9201
.. nonce: -A_u1x
.. section: Library

In distutils sdists, simply produce the "gztar" (gzipped tar format)
distributions on all platforms unless "formats" is supplied.

..

.. bpo: 2466
.. date: 9200
.. nonce: VRNlkg
.. section: Library

posixpath.ismount now correctly recognizes mount points which the user does
not have permission to access.

..

.. bpo: 9998
.. date: 9199
.. nonce: SNIoPr
.. section: Library

On Linux, ctypes.util.find_library now looks in LD_LIBRARY_PATH for shared
libraries.

..

.. bpo: 27573
.. date: 9198
.. nonce: yuXLnW
.. section: Library

exit message for code.interact is now configurable.

..

.. bpo: 27930
.. date: 9197
.. nonce: BkOfSi
.. section: Library

Improved behaviour of logging.handlers.QueueListener. Thanks to Paulo
Andrade and Petr Viktorin for the analysis and patch.

..

.. bpo: 6766
.. date: 9196
.. nonce: _zO4cV
.. section: Library

Distributed reference counting added to multiprocessing to support nesting
of shared values / proxy objects.

..

.. bpo: 21201
.. date: 9195
.. nonce: wLCKiA
.. section: Library

Improves readability of multiprocessing error message.  Thanks to Wojciech
Walczak for patch.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9194
.. nonce: hgCs-W
.. section: Library

asyncio: Add set_protocol / get_protocol to Transports.

..

.. bpo: 27456
.. date: 9193
.. nonce: lI_IE7
.. section: Library

asyncio: Set TCP_NODELAY by default.

..

.. bpo: 15308
.. date: 9192
.. nonce: zZxn8m
.. section: IDLE

Add 'interrupt execution' (^C) to Shell menu. Patch by Roger Serwy, updated
by Bayard Randel.

..

.. bpo: 27922
.. date: 9191
.. nonce: UEtEv9
.. section: IDLE

Stop IDLE tests from 'flashing' gui widgets on the screen.

..

.. bpo: 27891
.. date: 9190
.. nonce: 7W5cAj
.. section: IDLE

Consistently group and sort imports within idlelib modules.

..

.. bpo: 17642
.. date: 9189
.. nonce: B0BNOB
.. section: IDLE

add larger font sizes for classroom projection.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9188
.. nonce: zWZs6o
.. section: IDLE

Add version to title of IDLE help window.

..

.. bpo: 25564
.. date: 9187
.. nonce: GN0p14
.. section: IDLE

In section on IDLE -- console differences, mention that using exec means
that __builtins__ is defined for each statement.

..

.. bpo: 27821
.. date: 9186
.. nonce: Vzr42u
.. section: IDLE

Fix 3.6.0a3 regression that prevented custom key sets from being selected
when no custom theme was defined.

..

.. bpo: 26900
.. date: 9185
.. nonce: 0erSIc
.. section: C API

Excluded underscored names and other private API from limited API.

..

.. bpo: 26027
.. date: 9184
.. nonce: 5uVb7n
.. section: C API

Add support for path-like objects in PyUnicode_FSConverter() &
PyUnicode_FSDecoder().

..

.. bpo: 27427
.. date: 9183
.. nonce: OGhkYQ
.. section: Tests

Additional tests for the math module. Patch by Francisco Couzo.

..

.. bpo: 27953
.. date: 9182
.. nonce: oP3nuf
.. section: Tests

Skip math and cmath tests that fail on OS X 10.4 due to a poor libm
implementation of tan.

..

.. bpo: 26040
.. date: 9181
.. nonce: RvSU5I
.. section: Tests

Improve test_math and test_cmath coverage and rigour. Patch by Jeff Allen.

..

.. bpo: 27787
.. date: 9180
.. nonce: kf0YAt
.. section: Tests

Call gc.collect() before checking each test for "dangling threads", since
the dangling threads are weak references.

..

.. bpo: 27566
.. date: 9179
.. nonce: xDWjEb
.. section: Build

Fix clean target in freeze makefile (patch by Lisa Roach)

..

.. bpo: 27705
.. date: 9178
.. nonce: 8C2Ms3
.. section: Build

Update message in validate_ucrtbase.py

..

.. bpo: 27976
.. date: 9177
.. nonce: z0CT-3
.. section: Build

Deprecate building _ctypes with the bundled copy of libffi on non-OSX UNIX
platforms.

..

.. bpo: 27983
.. date: 9176
.. nonce: jL_1n8
.. section: Build

Cause lack of llvm-profdata tool when using clang as required for PGO
linking to be a configure time error rather than make time when
``--with-optimizations`` is enabled.  Also improve our ability to find the
llvm-profdata tool on MacOS and some Linuxes.

..

.. bpo: 21590
.. date: 9175
.. nonce: haPolL
.. section: Build

Support for DTrace and SystemTap probes.

..

.. bpo: 26307
.. date: 9174
.. nonce: Puk2rd
.. section: Build

The profile-opt build now applies PGO to the built-in modules.

..

.. bpo: 26359
.. date: 9173
.. nonce: uxKCqR
.. section: Build

Add the --with-optimizations flag to turn on LTO and PGO build support when
available.

..

.. bpo: 27917
.. date: 9172
.. nonce: 8V2esX
.. section: Build

Set platform triplets for Android builds.

..

.. bpo: 25825
.. date: 9171
.. nonce: PwGiUI
.. section: Build

Update references to the $(LIBPL) installation path on AIX. This path was
changed in 3.2a4.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9170
.. nonce: G27B6T
.. section: Build

Update OS X installer to use SQLite 3.14.1 and XZ 5.2.2.

..

.. bpo: 21122
.. date: 9169
.. nonce: 98ovv8
.. section: Build

Fix LTO builds on OS X.

..

.. bpo: 17128
.. date: 9168
.. nonce: jd3Cll
.. section: Build

Build OS X installer with a private copy of OpenSSL. Also provide a sample
Install Certificates command script to install a set of root certificates
from the third-party certifi module.

..

.. bpo: 27952
.. date: 9167
.. nonce: WX9Ufc
.. section: Tools/Demos

Get Tools/scripts/fixcid.py working with Python 3 and the current "re"
module, avoid invalid Python backslash escapes, and fix a bug parsing
escaped C quote signs.

..

.. bpo: 28065
.. date: 9166
.. nonce: TUW63o
.. section: Windows

Update xz dependency to 5.2.2 and build it from source.

..

.. bpo: 25144
.. date: 9165
.. nonce: iUha52
.. section: Windows

Ensures TargetDir is set before continuing with custom install.

..

.. bpo: 1602
.. date: 9164
.. nonce: 5Kowx0
.. section: Windows

Windows console doesn't input or print Unicode (PEP 528)

..

.. bpo: 27781
.. date: 9163
.. nonce: 21eQH2
.. section: Windows

Change file system encoding on Windows to UTF-8 (PEP 529)

..

.. bpo: 27731
.. date: 9162
.. nonce: U2HSrC
.. section: Windows

Opt-out of MAX_PATH on Windows 10

..

.. bpo: 6135
.. date: 9161
.. nonce: pACuPJ
.. section: Windows

Adds encoding and errors parameters to subprocess.

..

.. bpo: 27959
.. date: 9160
.. nonce: JamSoC
.. section: Windows

Adds oem encoding, alias ansi to mbcs, move aliasmbcs to codec lookup.

..

.. bpo: 27982
.. date: 9159
.. nonce: xrUa9R
.. section: Windows

The functions of the winsound module now accept keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 20366
.. date: 9158
.. nonce: s6b-ut
.. section: Windows

Build full text search support into SQLite on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 27756
.. date: 9157
.. nonce: PDAoGy
.. section: Windows

Adds new icons for Python files and processes on Windows. Designs by Cherry
Wang.

..

.. bpo: 27883
.. date: 9156
.. nonce: vyOnxj
.. section: Windows

Update sqlite to 3.14.1.0 on Windows.
