.. bpo: 17239
.. date: 2018-09-11-18-30-55
.. nonce: kOpwK2
.. release date: 2018-09-26
.. section: Security

The xml.sax and xml.dom.minidom parsers no longer processes external
entities by default. External DTD and ENTITY declarations no longer load
files or create network connections.

..

.. bpo: 34623
.. date: 2018-09-10-16-05-39
.. nonce: Ua9jMv
.. section: Security

CVE-2018-14647: The C accelerated _elementtree module now initializes hash
randomization salt from _Py_HashSecret instead of libexpat's default CSPRNG.

..

.. bpo: 34405
.. date: 2018-08-15-12-14-03
.. nonce: R4IZGw
.. section: Security

Updated to OpenSSL 1.0.2p for Windows builds.

..

.. bpo: 33871
.. date: 2018-06-26-19-35-33
.. nonce: S4HR9n
.. section: Security

Fixed sending the part of the file in :func:`os.sendfile` on macOS.  Using
the *trailers* argument could cause sending more bytes from the input file
than was specified.

..

.. bpo: 32533
.. date: 2018-05-28-08-55-30
.. nonce: IzwkBI
.. section: Security

Fixed thread-safety of error handling in _ssl.

..

.. bpo: 34735
.. date: 2018-09-19-06-57-34
.. nonce: -3mrSJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a memory leak in Modules/timemodule.c.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34588
.. date: 2018-09-05-22-56-52
.. nonce: UIuPmL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an off-by-one in the recursive call pruning feature of traceback
formatting.

..

.. bpo: 34527
.. date: 2018-08-28-11-53-39
.. nonce: aBEX9b
.. section: Core and Builtins

On FreeBSD, Py_DecodeLocale() and Py_EncodeLocale() now also forces the
ASCII encoding if the LC_CTYPE locale is "POSIX", not only if the LC_CTYPE
locale is "C".

..

.. bpo: 34400
.. date: 2018-08-14-03-52-43
.. nonce: AJD0bz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behavior in parsetok.c.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34377
.. date: 2018-08-10-15-05-00
.. nonce: EJMMY4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update valgrind suppression list to use
``_PyObject_Free``/``_PyObject_Realloc`` instead of
``PyObject_Free``/``PyObject_Realloc``.

..

.. bpo: 24618
.. date: 2018-07-14-14-01-37
.. nonce: iTKjD_
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed reading invalid memory when create the code object with too small
varnames tuple or too large argument counts.

..

.. bpo: 34068
.. date: 2018-07-14-08-58-46
.. nonce: 9xfM55
.. section: Core and Builtins

In :meth:`io.IOBase.close`, ensure that the :attr:`~io.IOBase.closed`
attribute is not set with a live exception.  Patch by Zackery Spytz and
Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 34080
.. date: 2018-07-10-11-24-16
.. nonce: 8t7PtO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a memory leak in the compiler when it raised some uncommon errors
during tokenizing.

..

.. bpo: 34066
.. date: 2018-07-07-20-15-34
.. nonce: y9vs6s
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disabled interruption by Ctrl-C between calling ``open()`` and entering a
**with** block in ``with open()``.

..

.. bpo: 33956
.. date: 2018-06-25-20-42-44
.. nonce: 1qoTwD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update vendored Expat library copy to version 2.2.5.

..

.. bpo: 24596
.. date: 2018-06-25-16-54-05
.. nonce: Rkwova
.. section: Core and Builtins

Decref the module object in :c:func:`PyRun_SimpleFileExFlags` before calling
:c:func:`PyErr_Print()`.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 33451
.. date: 2018-06-23-15-32-02
.. nonce: sWN-1l
.. section: Core and Builtins

Close directly executed pyc files before calling ``PyEval_EvalCode()``.

..

.. bpo: 33312
.. date: 2018-04-19-08-30-07
.. nonce: mDe2iL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed clang ubsan (undefined behavior sanitizer) warnings in dictobject.c by
adjusting how the internal struct _dictkeysobject shared keys structure is
declared.

..

.. bpo: 25750
.. date: 2018-03-14-21-42-17
.. nonce: lxgkQz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix rare Python crash due to bad refcounting in ``type_getattro()`` if a
descriptor deletes itself from the class. Patch by Jeroen Demeyer.

..

.. bpo: 25862
.. date: 2017-10-07-10-13-15
.. nonce: FPYBA5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix assertion failures in the ``tell()`` method of ``io.TextIOWrapper``.
Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34670
.. date: 2018-09-14-14-29-45
.. nonce: 17XwGB
.. section: Library

Add SSLContext.post_handshake_auth and
SSLSocket.verify_client_post_handshake for TLS 1.3's post handshake
authentication feature.

..

.. bpo: 34652
.. date: 2018-09-12-14-46-51
.. nonce: Rt1m1b
.. section: Library

Ensure :func:`os.lchmod` is never defined on Linux.

..

.. bpo: 34625
.. date: 2018-09-10-17-46-51
.. nonce: D2YfDz
.. section: Library

Update vendorized expat library version to 2.2.6.

..

.. bpo: 32270
.. date: 2018-09-10-14-15-53
.. nonce: wSJjuD
.. section: Library

The subprocess module no longer mistakenly closes redirected fds even when
they were in pass_fds when outside of the default {0, 1, 2} set.

..

.. bpo: 34610
.. date: 2018-09-08-12-57-07
.. nonce: wmoP5j
.. section: Library

Fixed iterator of :class:`multiprocessing.managers.DictProxy`.

..

.. bpo: 34421
.. date: 2018-09-07-10-57-00
.. nonce: AKJISD
.. section: Library

Fix distutils logging for non-ASCII strings.  This caused installation
issues on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 34604
.. date: 2018-09-07-10-16-34
.. nonce: xL7-kG
.. section: Library

Fix possible mojibake in the error message of `pwd.getpwnam` and
`grp.getgrnam`. Patch by William Grzybowski.

..

.. bpo: 34530
.. date: 2018-09-03-23-23-32
.. nonce: h_Xsu7
.. section: Library

``distutils.spawn.find_executable()`` now falls back on :data:`os.defpath`
if the ``PATH`` environment variable is not set.

..

.. bpo: 34563
.. date: 2018-09-01-20-43-10
.. nonce: 7NQK7B
.. section: Library

On Windows, fix multiprocessing.Connection for very large read: fix
_winapi.PeekNamedPipe() and _winapi.ReadFile() for read larger than INT_MAX
(usually 2^31-1).

..

.. bpo: 13312
.. date: 2018-08-24-17-31-27
.. nonce: 6hA5La
.. section: Library

Avoids a possible integer underflow (undefined behavior) in the time
module's year handling code when passed a very low negative year value.

..

.. bpo: 34472
.. date: 2018-08-23-09-25-08
.. nonce: cGyYrO
.. section: Library

Improved compatibility for streamed files in :mod:`zipfile`. Previously an
optional signature was not being written and certain ZIP applications were
not supported. Patch by Silas Sewell.

..

.. bpo: 6700
.. date: 2018-08-22-17-43-52
.. nonce: hp7C4B
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.getsourcelines for module level frames/tracebacks. Patch by
Vladimir Matveev.

..

.. bpo: 32947
.. date: 2018-08-14-08-57-01
.. nonce: mqStVW
.. section: Library

Add OP_ENABLE_MIDDLEBOX_COMPAT and test workaround for TLSv1.3 for future
compatibility with OpenSSL 1.1.1.

..

.. bpo: 34341
.. date: 2018-08-06-11-01-18
.. nonce: E0b9p2
.. section: Library

Appending to the ZIP archive with the ZIP64 extension no longer grows the
size of extra fields of existing entries.

..

.. bpo: 18540
.. date: 2018-08-02-21-28-38
.. nonce: AryoYY
.. section: Library

The :class:`imaplib.IMAP4` and :class:`imaplib.IMAP4_SSL` classes now
resolve to the local host IP correctly when the default value of *host*
parameter (``''``) is used.

..

.. bpo: 34246
.. date: 2018-07-29-15-25-15
.. nonce: xiKq-Q
.. section: Library

:meth:`smtplib.SMTP.send_message` no longer modifies the content of the
*mail_options* argument. Patch by Pablo S. Blum de Aguiar.

..

.. bpo: 31047
.. date: 2018-07-29-14-12-23
.. nonce: FSarLs
.. section: Library

Fix ``ntpath.abspath`` for invalid paths on windows. Patch by Franz
Woellert.

..

.. bpo: 34263
.. date: 2018-07-28-17-00-36
.. nonce: zUfRsu
.. section: Library

asyncio's event loop will not pass timeouts longer than one day to
epoll/select etc.

..

.. bpo: 32215
.. date: 2018-07-28-12-08-53
.. nonce: EU68SY
.. section: Library

Fix performance regression in :mod:`sqlite3` when a DML statement appeared
in a different line than the rest of the SQL query.

..

.. bpo: 19891
.. date: 2018-07-26-08-45-49
.. nonce: Y-3IiB
.. section: Library

Ignore errors caused by missing / non-writable homedir while writing history
during exit of an interactive session.  Patch by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 940286
.. date: 2018-07-22-07-59-32
.. nonce: NZTzyc
.. section: Library

pydoc's ``Helper.showtopic()`` method now prints the cross references of a
topic correctly.

..

.. bpo: 34164
.. date: 2018-07-20-18-06-00
.. nonce: fNfT-q
.. section: Library

:func:`base64.b32decode` could raise UnboundLocalError or OverflowError for
incorrect padding.  Now it always raises :exc:`base64.Error` in these cases.

..

.. bpo: 33967
.. date: 2018-07-08-18-49-41
.. nonce: lhaAez
.. section: Library

functools.singledispatch now raises TypeError instead of IndexError when no
positional arguments are passed.

..

.. bpo: 34054
.. date: 2018-07-05-18-37-05
.. nonce: nWRS6M
.. section: Library

The multiprocessing module now uses the monotonic clock
:func:`time.monotonic` instead of the system clock :func:`time.time` to
implement timeout.

..

.. bpo: 34010
.. date: 2018-07-04-07-36-53
.. nonce: VNDkde
.. section: Library

Fixed a performance regression for reading streams with tarfile. The
buffered read should use a list, instead of appending to a bytes object.

..

.. bpo: 34019
.. date: 2018-07-02-05-59-11
.. nonce: ZXJIife
.. section: Library

webbrowser: Correct the arguments passed to Opera Browser when opening a new
URL using the ``webbrowser`` module. Patch by Bumsik Kim.

..

.. bpo: 33978
.. date: 2018-06-29-12-23-34
.. nonce: y4csIw
.. section: Library

Closed existing logging handlers before reconfiguration via fileConfig and
dictConfig. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 14117
.. date: 2018-06-29-00-31-36
.. nonce: 3nvDuR
.. section: Library

Make minor tweaks to turtledemo. The 'wikipedia' example is now 'rosette',
decribing what it draws.  The 'penrose' print output is reduced. The'1024'
output of 'tree' is eliminated.

..

.. bpo: 33974
.. date: 2018-06-28-14-56-44
.. nonce: SA8nNP
.. section: Library

Fixed passing lists and tuples of strings containing special characters
``"``, ``\``, ``{``, ``}`` and ``\n`` as options to :mod:`~tkinter.ttk`
widgets.

..

.. bpo: 27500
.. date: 2018-06-28-13-00-12
.. nonce: _s1gZ5
.. section: Library

Fix getaddrinfo to resolve IPv6 addresses correctly.

..

.. bpo: 24567
.. date: 2018-06-27-00-31-30
.. nonce: FuePyY
.. section: Library

Improve random.choices() to handle subnormal input weights that could
occasionally trigger an IndexError.

..

.. bpo: 33871
.. date: 2018-06-26-19-03-56
.. nonce: XhlrGU
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflow in :func:`os.readv` and :func:`os.writev` and in
:func:`os.sendfile` with *headers* or *trailers* arguments (on BSD-based
OSes and macOS).

..

.. bpo: 33899
.. date: 2018-06-24-01-57-14
.. nonce: IaOcAr
.. section: Library

Tokenize module now implicitly emits a NEWLINE when provided with input that
does not have a trailing new line.  This behavior now matches what the C
tokenizer does internally.  Contributed by Ammar Askar.

..

.. bpo: 33916
.. date: 2018-06-21-11-35-47
.. nonce: cZgPCD
.. section: Library

bz2 and lzma: When Decompressor.__init__() is called twice, free the old
lock to not leak memory.

..

.. bpo: 32568
.. date: 2018-06-21-09-33-02
.. nonce: f_meGY
.. section: Library

Make select.epoll() and its documentation consistent regarding *sizehint*
and *flags*.

..

.. bpo: 33663
.. date: 2018-06-17-10-48-03
.. nonce: sUuGmq
.. section: Library

Convert content length to string before putting to header.

..

.. bpo: 26544
.. date: 2018-06-13-20-33-29
.. nonce: hQ1oMt
.. section: Library

Fixed implementation of :func:`platform.libc_ver`. It almost always returned
version '2.9' for glibc.

..

.. bpo: 27397
.. date: 2018-06-10-09-43-54
.. nonce: 0_fFQR
.. section: Library

Make email module properly handle invalid-length base64 strings.

..

.. bpo: 33476
.. date: 2018-06-08-00-29-40
.. nonce: R0Bhlj
.. section: Library

Fix _header_value_parser.py when address group is missing final ';'.
Contributed by Enrique Perez-Terron

..

.. bpo: 33570
.. date: 2018-05-18-21-50-47
.. nonce: 7CZy4t
.. section: Library

Change TLS 1.3 cipher suite settings for compatibility with OpenSSL
1.1.1-pre6 and newer. OpenSSL 1.1.1 will have TLS 1.3 cipers enabled by
default.

..

.. bpo: 33365
.. date: 2018-05-08-15-01-10
.. nonce: SicsAd
.. section: Library

Print the header values besides the header keys instead just the header keys
if *debuglevel* is set to >0 in :mod:`http.client`. Patch by Marco Strigl.

..

.. bpo: 33336
.. date: 2018-04-27-22-18-38
.. nonce: T8rxn0
.. section: Library

``imaplib`` now allows ``MOVE`` command in ``IMAP4.uid()`` (RFC 6851: IMAP
MOVE Extension) and potentially as a name of supported method of ``IMAP4``
object.

..

.. bpo: 32356
.. date: 2017-12-17-22-50-51
.. nonce: roZJpA
.. section: Library

asyncio.transport.resume_reading() and pause_reading() are now idempotent.

..

.. bpo: 31608
.. date: 2017-10-29-10-37-55
.. nonce: wkp8Nw
.. section: Library

Raise a ``TypeError`` instead of crashing if a ``collections.deque``
subclass returns a non-deque from ``__new__``. Patch by Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 29456
.. date: 2017-08-24-17-55-39
.. nonce: XaB3MP
.. section: Library

Fix bugs in hangul normalization: u1176, u11a7 and u11c3

..

.. bpo: 28617
.. date: 2018-09-06-22-39-47
.. nonce: MjnJLz
.. section: Documentation

Fixed info in the stdtypes docs concerning the types that support membership
tests.

..

.. bpo: 34065
.. date: 2018-07-07-20-38-41
.. nonce: 1snofM
.. section: Documentation

Fix wrongly written basicConfig documentation markup syntax

..

.. bpo: 33847
.. date: 2018-06-15-14-58-45
.. nonce: IIDp6t
.. section: Documentation

Add '@' operator entry to index.

..

.. bpo: 25041
.. date: 2017-10-23-13-41-12
.. nonce: iAo2gW
.. section: Documentation

Document ``AF_PACKET`` in the :mod:`socket` module.

..

.. bpo: 34587
.. date: 2018-09-13-20-58-07
.. nonce: rCcxp3
.. section: Tests

test_socket: Remove RDSTest.testCongestion(). The test tries to fill the
receiver's socket buffer and expects an error. But the RDS protocol doesn't
require that. Moreover, the Linux implementation of RDS expects that the
producer of the messages reduces its rate, it's not the role of the receiver
to trigger an error. The test fails on Fedora 28 by design, so just remove
it.

..

.. bpo: 34661
.. date: 2018-09-13-09-53-15
.. nonce: bdTamP
.. section: Tests

Fix test_shutil if unzip doesn't support -t.

..

.. bpo: 34200
.. date: 2018-09-12-17-00-34
.. nonce: dfxYQK
.. section: Tests

Fixed non-deterministic flakiness of test_pkg by not using the scary
test.support.module_cleanup() logic to save and restore sys.modules contents
between test cases.

..

.. bpo: 34594
.. date: 2018-09-05-23-50-21
.. nonce: tqL-GS
.. section: Tests

Fix usage of hardcoded ``errno`` values in the tests.

..

.. bpo: 34542
.. date: 2018-08-29-16-30-52
.. nonce: 9stVAW
.. section: Tests

Use 3072 RSA keys and SHA-256 signature for test certs and keys.

..

.. bpo: 34391
.. date: 2018-08-16-18-48-47
.. nonce: ouNfxC
.. section: Tests

Fix ftplib test for TLS 1.3 by reading from data socket.

..

.. bpo: 34399
.. date: 2018-08-14-10-47-44
.. nonce: D_jd1G
.. section: Tests

Update all RSA keys and DH params to use at least 2048 bits.

..

.. bpo: 33746
.. date: 2018-06-19-17-55-46
.. nonce: Sz7avn
.. section: Tests

Fix test_unittest when run in verbose mode.

..

.. bpo: 33901
.. date: 2018-06-19-14-04-21
.. nonce: OFW1Sr
.. section: Tests

Fix test_dbm_gnu on macOS with gdbm 1.15: add a larger value to make sure
that the file size changes.

..

.. bpo: 33873
.. date: 2018-06-16-01-37-31
.. nonce: d86vab
.. section: Tests

Fix a bug in ``regrtest`` that caused an extra test to run if
--huntrleaks/-R was used. Exit with error in case that invalid parameters
are specified to --huntrleaks/-R (at least one warmup run and one repetition
must be used).

..

.. bpo: 32663
.. date: 2018-01-25-18-10-47
.. nonce: IKDsqu
.. section: Tests

Making sure the `SMTPUTF8SimTests` class of tests gets run in
test_smtplib.py.

..

.. bpo: 34710
.. date: 2018-09-17-13-56-12
.. nonce: ARqIAK
.. section: Build

Fixed SSL module build with OpenSSL & pedantic CFLAGS.

..

.. bpo: 34582
.. date: 2018-09-14-09-53-21
.. nonce: j3omgk
.. section: Build

Add JUnit XML output for regression tests and update Azure DevOps builds.

..

.. bpo: 34121
.. date: 2018-07-15-16-49-06
.. nonce: 74G_lo
.. section: Build

Fix detection of C11 atomic support on clang.

..

.. bpo: 30345
.. date: 2018-06-15-18-18-16
.. nonce: j-xRE1
.. section: Build

Add -g to LDFLAGS when compiling with LTO to get debug symbols.

..

.. bpo: 34770
.. date: 2018-09-22-11-02-35
.. nonce: 4lEUOd
.. section: Windows

Fix a possible null pointer dereference in pyshellext.cpp.

..

.. bpo: 34603
.. date: 2018-09-13-08-29-04
.. nonce: 2AB7sc
.. section: Windows

Fix returning structs from functions produced by MSVC

..

.. bpo: 34225
.. date: 2018-07-25-16-13-12
.. nonce: ngemNL
.. section: Windows

Ensure INCLUDE and LIB directories do not end with a backslash.

..

.. bpo: 34006
.. date: 2018-07-02-14-19-32
.. nonce: 7SgBT_
.. section: Windows

Revert line length limit for Windows help docs. The line-length limit is not
needed because the pages appear in a separate app rather than on a browser
tab.  It can also interact badly with the DPI setting.

..

.. bpo: 31546
.. date: 2018-06-27-23-33-54
.. nonce: zJlap-
.. section: Windows

Restore running PyOS_InputHook while waiting for user input at the prompt.
The restores integration of interactive GUI windows (such as Matplotlib
figures) with the prompt on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 30237
.. date: 2018-06-25-09-33-48
.. nonce: EybiZA
.. section: Windows

Output error when ReadConsole is canceled by CancelSynchronousIo instead of
crashing.

..

.. bpo: 29097
.. date: 2018-05-16-11-31-17
.. nonce: 9mqEuI
.. section: Windows

Fix bug where :meth:`datetime.fromtimestamp` erronously throws an
:exc:`OSError` on Windows for values between 0 and 86400. Patch by Ammar
Askar.

..

.. bpo: 34370
.. date: 2018-09-25-23-37-39
.. nonce: FQhtAD
.. section: macOS

Have macOS 10.9+ installer builds for 3.7.1rc and 3.6.7rc use a development
snapshot of Tk 8.6 (post-8.6.8) to mitigate certain scroller issues seen
with IDLE and tkinter apps.

..

.. bpo: 34405
.. date: 2018-09-11-08-47-50
.. nonce: f1-fT5
.. section: macOS

Update to OpenSSL 1.0.2p for macOS installer builds.

..

.. bpo: 31903
.. date: 2017-11-01-16-53-12
.. nonce: K6jCVG
.. section: macOS

In :mod:`_scproxy`, drop the GIL when calling into ``SystemConfiguration``
to avoid deadlocks.

..

.. bpo: 34548
.. date: 2018-09-22-20-25-07
.. nonce: 7pBzjg
.. section: IDLE

Use configured color theme for read-only text views.

..

.. bpo: 1529353
.. date: 2018-08-13-16-31-24
.. nonce: wXfQJk
.. section: IDLE

Enable "squeezing" of long outputs in the shell, to avoid performance
degradation and to clean up the history without losing it.  Squeezed outputs
may be copied, viewed in a separate window, and "unsqueezed".

..

.. bpo: 34047
.. date: 2018-08-05-15-49-55
.. nonce: LGKsIm
.. section: IDLE

Fixed mousewheel scrolling direction on macOS.

..

.. bpo: 34275
.. date: 2018-08-02-22-16-42
.. nonce: Iu0d7t
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE calltips always visible on Mac. Some MacOS-tk combinations need
.update_idletasks(). Patch by Kevin Walzer.

..

.. bpo: 34120
.. date: 2018-08-01-23-25-38
.. nonce: HgsIz-
.. section: IDLE

Fix unresponsiveness after closing certain windows and dialogs.

..

.. bpo: 33975
.. date: 2018-06-26-22-53-14
.. nonce: Ow7alv
.. section: IDLE

Avoid small type when running htests. Since part of the purpose of
human-viewed tests is to determine that widgets look right, it is important that
they look the same for testing as when running IDLE.

..

.. bpo: 33905
.. date: 2018-06-21-20-35-33
.. nonce: W2mhiY
.. section: IDLE

Add test for idlelib.stackview.StackBrowser.

..

.. bpo: 33924
.. date: 2018-06-20-22-14-07
.. nonce: 6Rz1wt
.. section: IDLE

Change mainmenu.menudefs key 'windows' to 'window'. Every other menudef key
is lowercase version of main menu entry.

..

.. bpo: 33906
.. date: 2018-06-20-19-16-24
.. nonce: a1lXq0
.. section: IDLE

Rename idlelib.windows as window Match Window on the main menu and remove
last plural module name.

..

.. bpo: 33917
.. date: 2018-06-20-16-27-48
.. nonce: ZXHs8x
.. section: IDLE

Fix and document idlelib/idle_test/template.py. The revised file compiles,
runs, and tests OK.  idle_test/README.txt explains how to use it to create
new IDLE test files.

..

.. bpo: 33904
.. date: 2018-06-20-12-40-54
.. nonce: qm0eCu
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: In rstrip, rename class RstripExtension as Rstrip

..

.. bpo: 33907
.. date: 2018-06-19-22-21-27
.. nonce: z-_B3N
.. section: IDLE

For consistency and clarity, rename an IDLE module and classes. Module
calltips and its class CallTips are now calltip and Calltip. In module
calltip_w, class CallTip is now CalltipWindow.

..

.. bpo: 33856
.. date: 2018-06-16-21-54-45
.. nonce: TH8WHU
.. section: IDLE

Add "help" in the welcome message of IDLE

..

.. bpo: 33839
.. date: 2018-06-14-13-23-55
.. nonce: ZlJzHa
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: refactor ToolTip and CallTip and add documentation and tests

..

.. bpo: 33855
.. date: 2018-06-14-11-35-50
.. nonce: XL230W
.. section: IDLE

Minimally test all IDLE modules. Add missing files, import module,
instantiate classes, and check coverage. Check existing files.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-06-14-16-23-07
.. nonce: Q3Dwns
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb now catchs ``UnicodeDecodeError`` exceptions when calling
``string()``.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-06-14-16-16-53
.. nonce: 2YfdwI
.. section: Tools/Demos

python-gdb now catchs ValueError on read_var(): when Python has no debug
symbols for example.

..

.. bpo: 23927
.. date: 2018-07-09-11-39-54
.. nonce: pDFkxb
.. section: C API

Fixed :exc:`SystemError` in :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords` when the
``w*`` format unit is used for optional parameter.
