.. bpo: 34879
.. date: 2018-10-02-22-55-11
.. nonce: 7VNH2a
.. release date: 2018-10-13
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible null pointer dereference in bytesobject.c.  Patch by Zackery
Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34320
.. date: 2018-08-02-22-34-59
.. nonce: hNshAA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``dict(od)`` didn't copy iteration order of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 34769
.. date: 2018-10-09-11-01-16
.. nonce: cSkkZt
.. section: Library

Fix for async generators not finalizing when event loop is in debug mode and
garbage collector runs in another thread.

..

.. bpo: 34922
.. date: 2018-10-07-21-18-52
.. nonce: 37IdsA
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflow in the :meth:`~hashlib.shake.digest()` and
:meth:`~hashlib.shake.hexdigest()` methods for the SHAKE algorithm in the
:mod:`hashlib` module.

..

.. bpo: 34871
.. date: 2018-10-04-18-46-54
.. nonce: t3X-dB
.. section: Library

Fix inspect module polluted ``sys.modules`` when parsing
``__text_signature__`` of callable.

..

.. bpo: 34872
.. date: 2018-10-02-19-36-34
.. nonce: yWZRhI
.. section: Library

Fix self-cancellation in C implementation of asyncio.Task

..

.. bpo: 34819
.. date: 2018-09-27-09-45-00
.. nonce: 9ZaFyO
.. section: Library

Use a monotonic clock to compute timeouts in :meth:`Executor.map` and
:func:`as_completed`, in order to prevent timeouts from deviating when the
system clock is adjusted.

..

.. bpo: 34521
.. date: 2018-10-13-19-15-23
.. nonce: YPaiTK
.. release date: 2018-10-20
.. section: Library

Use :func:`socket.CMSG_SPACE` to calculate ancillary data size instead of
:func:`socket.CMSG_LEN` in :func:`multiprocessing.reduction.recvfds` as
:rfc:`3542` requires the use of the former for portable applications.

..

.. bpo: 34282
.. date: 2018-09-02-13-33-35
.. nonce: ztyXH8
.. section: Library

Fix enum members getting shadowed by parent attributes.

..

.. bpo: 34172
.. date: 2018-07-26-10-31-52
.. nonce: 8ovLNi
.. section: Library

Fix a reference issue inside multiprocessing.Pool that caused the pool to
remain alive if it was deleted without being closed or terminated
explicitly.

..

.. bpo: 33729
.. date: 2018-07-20-09-11-05
.. nonce: sO6iTb
.. section: Library

Fixed issues with arguments parsing in :mod:`hashlib`.

..

.. bpo: 32174
.. date: 2018-10-08-19-15-28
.. nonce: YO9CYm
.. section: Documentation

chm document displays non-ASCII charaters properly on some MBCS Windows
systems.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-05-10-16-59-15
.. nonce: S-rcIN
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_gdb when Python is compiled with flags -mcet -fcf-protection -O0.

..

.. bpo: 34370
.. date: 2018-10-13-02-07-55
.. nonce: FqUqcG
.. section: macOS

Revert to using the released Tk 8.6.8 with macOS installers instead of the
Tk 8.6.x development snapshot used with 3.7.1rc1 and 3.6.7rc1. The snapshot
introduced at least one significant regression (bpo-34927).

..

.. bpo: 34910
.. date: 2018-10-05-17-06-49
.. nonce: tSFrls
.. section: C API

Ensure that :c:func:`PyObject_Print` always returns ``-1`` on error.  Patch
by Zackery Spytz.
