.. bpo: 33786
.. date: 2018-06-06-23-24-40
.. nonce: lBvT8z
.. release date: 2018-06-11
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix asynchronous generators to handle GeneratorExit in athrow() correctly

..

.. bpo: 30654
.. date: 2018-05-28-12-28-53
.. nonce: 9fDJye
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed reset of the SIGINT handler to SIG_DFL on interpreter shutdown even
when there was a custom handler set previously. Patch by Philipp Kerling.

..

.. bpo: 33622
.. date: 2018-05-23-20-46-14
.. nonce: xPucO9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a leak when the garbage collector fails to add an object with the
``__del__`` method or referenced by it into the :data:`gc.garbage` list.
:c:func:`PyGC_Collect` can now be called when an exception is set and
preserves it.

..

.. bpo: 31849
.. date: 2018-05-14-11-00-00
.. nonce: EmHaH4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix signed/unsigned comparison warning in pyhash.c.

..

.. bpo: 33391
.. date: 2018-05-02-08-36-03
.. nonce: z4a7rb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a leak in set_symmetric_difference().

..

.. bpo: 28055
.. date: 2018-04-25-20-44-42
.. nonce: f49kfC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix unaligned accesses in siphash24(). Patch by Rolf Eike Beer.

..

.. bpo: 33231
.. date: 2018-04-05-22-20-44
.. nonce: 3Jmo0q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix potential memory leak in ``normalizestring()``.

..

.. bpo: 29922
.. date: 2018-04-03-00-30-25
.. nonce: CdLuMl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improved error messages in 'async with' when ``__aenter__()`` or
``__aexit__()`` return non-awaitable object.

..

.. bpo: 33199
.. date: 2018-04-02-09-32-40
.. nonce: TPnxQu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``ma_version_tag`` in dict implementation is uninitialized when copying
from key-sharing dict.

..

.. bpo: 33041
.. date: 2018-03-18-13-56-14
.. nonce: XwPhI2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed jumping when the function contains an ``async for`` loop.

..

.. bpo: 32282
.. date: 2017-12-12-14-02-28
.. nonce: xFVMTn
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an unnecessary ifdef in the include of VersionHelpers.h in socketmodule
on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 21983
.. date: 2017-10-02-21-02-14
.. nonce: UoC319
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in `ctypes.cast()` in case the type argument is a ctypes
structured data type. Patch by Eryk Sun and Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 30167
.. date: 2018-06-10-19-29-17
.. nonce: G5EgC5
.. section: Library

Prevent site.main() exception if PYTHONSTARTUP is set. Patch by Steve Weber.

..

.. bpo: 33812
.. date: 2018-06-10-13-26-02
.. nonce: frGAOr
.. section: Library

Datetime instance d with non-None tzinfo, but with d.tzinfo.utcoffset(d)
returning None is now treated as naive by the astimezone() method.

..

.. bpo: 30805
.. date: 2018-06-08-17-34-16
.. nonce: 3qCWa0
.. section: Library

Avoid race condition with debug logging

..

.. bpo: 33767
.. date: 2018-06-03-22-41-59
.. nonce: 2e82g3
.. section: Library

The concatenation (``+``) and repetition (``*``) sequence operations now
raise :exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`SystemError` when performed on
:class:`mmap.mmap` objects.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 32684
.. date: 2018-05-29-12-51-18
.. nonce: ZEIism
.. section: Library

Fix gather to propagate cancellation of itself even with return_exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 33674
.. date: 2018-05-28-22-49-59
.. nonce: 6LFFj7
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in SSLProtocol.connection_made() of asyncio.sslproto:
start immediately the handshake instead of using call_soon(). Previously,
data_received() could be called before the handshake started, causing the
handshake to hang or fail.

..

.. bpo: 31647
.. date: 2018-05-28-18-40-26
.. nonce: s4Fad3
.. section: Library

Fixed bug where calling write_eof() on a _SelectorSocketTransport after it's
already closed raises AttributeError.

..

.. bpo: 33672
.. date: 2018-05-28-17-45-06
.. nonce: GM_Xm_
.. section: Library

Fix Task.__repr__ crash with Cython's bogus coroutines

..

.. bpo: 33469
.. date: 2018-05-28-15-55-12
.. nonce: hmXBpY
.. section: Library

Fix RuntimeError after closing loop that used run_in_executor

..

.. bpo: 11874
.. date: 2018-05-23-00-26-27
.. nonce: glK5iP
.. section: Library

Use a better regex when breaking usage into wrappable parts. Avoids bogus
assertion errors from custom metavar strings.

..

.. bpo: 30877
.. date: 2018-05-22-13-05-12
.. nonce: JZEGjI
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in the Python implementation of the JSON decoder that prevented
the cache of parsed strings from clearing after finishing the decoding.
Based on patch by c-fos.

..

.. bpo: 33548
.. date: 2018-05-16-17-05-48
.. nonce: xWslmx
.. section: Library

tempfile._candidate_tempdir_list should consider common TEMP locations

..

.. bpo: 33542
.. date: 2018-05-16-09-30-27
.. nonce: idNAcs
.. section: Library

Prevent ``uuid.get_node`` from using a DUID instead of a MAC on Windows.
Patch by Zvi Effron

..

.. bpo: 26819
.. date: 2018-05-16-05-24-43
.. nonce: taxbVT
.. section: Library

Fix race condition with `ReadTransport.resume_reading` in Windows proactor
event loop.

..

.. bpo: 28556
.. date: 2018-05-10-14-51-19
.. nonce: y3zK6I
.. section: Library

Minor fixes in typing module: add annotations to ``NamedTuple.__new__``,
pass ``*args`` and ``**kwds`` in ``Generic.__new__``.  Original PRs by
Paulius Šarka and Chad Dombrova.

..

.. bpo: 20087
.. date: 2018-05-05-18-02-24
.. nonce: lJrvXL
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping with glibc 2.27 supported locales.

..

.. bpo: 33422
.. date: 2018-05-05-09-53-05
.. nonce: 4FtQ0q
.. section: Library

Fix trailing quotation marks getting deleted when looking up byte/string
literals on pydoc. Patch by Andrés Delfino.

..

.. bpo: 33197
.. date: 2018-04-29-23-56-20
.. nonce: dgRLqr
.. section: Library

Update error message when constructing invalid inspect.Parameters Patch by
Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 33383
.. date: 2018-04-29-11-15-38
.. nonce: g32YWn
.. section: Library

Fixed crash in the get() method of the :mod:`dbm.ndbm` database object when
it is called with a single argument.

..

.. bpo: 33329
.. date: 2018-04-23-13-21-39
.. nonce: lQ-Eod
.. section: Library

Fix multiprocessing regression on newer glibcs

..

.. bpo: 991266
.. date: 2018-04-21-00-24-08
.. nonce: h93TP_
.. section: Library

Fix quoting of the ``Comment`` attribute of
:class:`http.cookies.SimpleCookie`.

..

.. bpo: 33131
.. date: 2018-04-20-10-43-17
.. nonce: L2E977
.. section: Library

Upgrade bundled version of pip to 10.0.1.

..

.. bpo: 33308
.. date: 2018-04-18-19-12-25
.. nonce: fW75xi
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in the :mod:`parser` module when converting an ST object to a
tree of tuples or lists with ``line_info=False`` and ``col_info=True``.

..

.. bpo: 33263
.. date: 2018-04-11-20-29-19
.. nonce: B56Hc1
.. section: Library

Fix FD leak in `_SelectorSocketTransport`  Patch by Vlad Starostin.

..

.. bpo: 33256
.. date: 2018-04-10-20-57-14
.. nonce: ndHkqu
.. section: Library

Fix display of ``<module>`` call in the html produced by ``cgitb.html()``.
Patch by Stéphane Blondon.

..

.. bpo: 33203
.. date: 2018-04-05-11-09-45
.. nonce: Hje9Py
.. section: Library

``random.Random.choice()`` now raises ``IndexError`` for empty sequences
consistently even when called from subclasses without a ``getrandbits()``
implementation.

..

.. bpo: 33224
.. date: 2018-04-04-23-41-30
.. nonce: pyR0jB
.. section: Library

Update difflib.mdiff() for PEP 479.  Convert an uncaught StopIteration in a
generator into a return-statement.

..

.. bpo: 33209
.. date: 2018-04-03-10-37-13
.. nonce: 9sGWE_
.. section: Library

End framing at the end of C implementation of :func:`pickle.Pickler.dump`.

..

.. bpo: 32861
.. date: 2018-04-02-20-44-54
.. nonce: HeBjzN
.. section: Library

The urllib.robotparser's ``__str__`` representation now includes wildcard
entries and the "Crawl-delay" and "Request-rate" fields. Patch by Michael
Lazar.

..

.. bpo: 33096
.. date: 2018-03-25-13-18-16
.. nonce: ofdbe7
.. section: Library

Allow ttk.Treeview.insert to insert iid that has a false boolean value. Note
iid=0 and iid=False would be same. Patch by Garvit Khatri.

..

.. bpo: 33127
.. date: 2018-03-24-15-08-24
.. nonce: olJmHv
.. section: Library

The ssl module now compiles with LibreSSL 2.7.1.

..

.. bpo: 33021
.. date: 2018-03-12-00-27-56
.. nonce: m19B9T
.. section: Library

Release the GIL during fstat() calls, avoiding hang of all threads when
calling mmap.mmap(), os.urandom(), and random.seed().  Patch by Nir Soffer.

..

.. bpo: 27683
.. date: 2018-03-07-22-28-17
.. nonce: 572Rv4
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in :mod:`ipaddress` that result of :meth:`hosts` is empty
when the network is constructed by a tuple containing an integer mask and
only 1 bit left for addresses.

..

.. bpo: 32844
.. date: 2018-02-28-13-08-00
.. nonce: u8tnAe
.. section: Library

Fix wrong redirection of a low descriptor (0 or 1) to stderr in subprocess
if another low descriptor is closed.

..

.. bpo: 31908
.. date: 2017-10-31
.. nonce: g4xh8x
.. section: Library

Fix output of cover files for ``trace`` module command-line tool. Previously
emitted cover files only when ``--missing`` option was used. Patch by
Michael Selik.

..

.. bpo: 31457
.. date: 2017-10-18-19-05-17
.. nonce: KlE6r8
.. section: Library

If nested log adapters are used, the inner ``process()`` methods are no
longer omitted.

..

.. bpo: 16865
.. date: 2017-09-29-16-40-38
.. nonce: l-f6I_
.. section: Library

Support arrays >=2GiB in :mod:`ctypes`.  Patch by Segev Finer.

..

.. bpo: 31238
.. date: 2017-08-21-12-31-53
.. nonce: Gg0LRH
.. section: Library

pydoc: the stop() method of the private ServerThread class now waits until
DocServer.serve_until_quit() completes and then explicitly sets its
docserver attribute to None to break a reference cycle.

..

.. bpo: 33503
.. date: 2018-05-14-20-08-58
.. nonce: Wvt0qg
.. section: Documentation

Fix broken pypi link

..

.. bpo: 33421
.. date: 2018-05-14-15-23-51
.. nonce: 3GU_QO
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for ``typing.AsyncContextManager``.

..

.. bpo: 33378
.. date: 2018-04-29-04-02-18
.. nonce: -anAHN
.. section: Documentation

Add Korean language switcher for https://docs.python.org/3/

..

.. bpo: 33276
.. date: 2018-04-20-14-09-36
.. nonce: rA1z_3
.. section: Documentation

Clarify that the ``__path__`` attribute on modules cannot be just any value.

..

.. bpo: 33201
.. date: 2018-04-01-21-03-41
.. nonce: aa8Lkl
.. section: Documentation

Modernize documentation for writing C extension types.

..

.. bpo: 33195
.. date: 2018-04-01-14-30-36
.. nonce: dRS-XX
.. section: Documentation

Deprecate ``Py_UNICODE`` usage in ``c-api/arg`` document. ``Py_UNICODE``
related APIs are deprecated since Python 3.3, but it is missed in the
document.

..

.. bpo: 33126
.. date: 2018-03-28-17-03-17
.. nonce: 5UGkNv
.. section: Documentation

Document PyBuffer_ToContiguous().

..

.. bpo: 27212
.. date: 2018-03-22-19-23-04
.. nonce: wrE5KR
.. section: Documentation

Modify documentation for the :func:`islice` recipe to consume initial values
up to the start index.

..

.. bpo: 28247
.. date: 2018-03-20-20-11-05
.. nonce: -V-WS-
.. section: Documentation

Update :mod:`zipapp` documentation to describe how to make standalone
applications.

..

.. bpo: 18802
.. date: 2018-03-11-18-53-47
.. nonce: JhAqH3
.. section: Documentation

Documentation changes for ipaddress.  Patch by Jon Foster and Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 27428
.. date: 2018-03-11-00-16-56
.. nonce: B7A8FT
.. section: Documentation

Update documentation to clarify that ``WindowsRegistryFinder`` implements
``MetaPathFinder``. (Patch by Himanshu Lakhara)

..

.. bpo: 8243
.. date: 2018-01-13-20-30-53
.. nonce: s98r28
.. section: Documentation

Add a note about curses.addch and curses.addstr exception behavior when
writing outside a window, or pad.

..

.. bpo: 31432
.. date: 2017-09-13-07-14-59
.. nonce: yAY4Z3
.. section: Documentation

Clarify meaning of CERT_NONE, CERT_OPTIONAL, and CERT_REQUIRED flags for
ssl.SSLContext.verify_mode.

..

.. bpo: 33655
.. date: 2018-05-26-16-01-40
.. nonce: Frb4LA
.. section: Tests

Ignore test_posix_fallocate failures on BSD platforms that might be due to
running on ZFS.

..

.. bpo: 19417
.. date: 2018-01-08-13-33-47
.. nonce: 2asoXy
.. section: Tests

Add test_bdb.py.

..

.. bpo: 5755
.. date: 2018-06-04-21-34-34
.. nonce: 65GmCj
.. section: Build

Move ``-Wstrict-prototypes`` option to ``CFLAGS_NODIST`` from ``OPT``. This
option emitted annoying warnings when building extension modules written in
C++.

..

.. bpo: 33614
.. date: 2018-05-28-11-40-22
.. nonce: 28e0sE
.. section: Build

Ensures module definition files for the stable ABI on Windows are correctly
regenerated.

..

.. bpo: 33522
.. date: 2018-05-15-12-44-50
.. nonce: mJoNcA
.. section: Build

Enable CI builds on Visual Studio Team Services at
https://python.visualstudio.com/cpython

..

.. bpo: 33012
.. date: 2018-05-10-21-10-01
.. nonce: 5Zfjac
.. section: Build

Add ``-Wno-cast-function-type`` for gcc 8 for silencing warnings about
function casts like casting to PyCFunction in method definition lists.

..

.. bpo: 33394
.. date: 2018-04-30-17-36-46
.. nonce: _Vdi4t
.. section: Build

Enable the verbose build for extension modules, when GNU make is passed
macros on the command line.

..

.. bpo: 33184
.. date: 2018-04-13-11-39-28
.. nonce: aEohx0
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to OpenSSL 1.0.2o.

..

.. bpo: 33184
.. date: 2018-04-07-00-58-50
.. nonce: rMTiqu
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer build to use OpenSSL 1.0.2o.

..

.. bpo: 33656
.. date: 2018-06-10-17-59-36
.. nonce: 60ZqJS
.. section: IDLE

On Windows, add API call saying that tk scales for DPI. On Windows 8.1+ or
10, with DPI compatibility properties of the Python binary unchanged, and a
monitor resolution greater than 96 DPI, this should make text and lines
sharper.  It should otherwise have no effect.

..

.. bpo: 33768
.. date: 2018-06-04-19-23-11
.. nonce: I_2qpV
.. section: IDLE

Clicking on a context line moves that line to the top of the editor window.

..

.. bpo: 33763
.. date: 2018-06-03-20-12-57
.. nonce: URiFlE
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: Use read-only text widget for code context instead of label widget.

..

.. bpo: 33664
.. date: 2018-06-03-09-13-28
.. nonce: PZzQyL
.. section: IDLE

Scroll IDLE editor text by lines. Previously, the mouse wheel and scrollbar
slider moved text by a fixed number of pixels, resulting in partial lines at
the top of the editor box.  The change also applies to the shell and grep
output windows, but not to read-only text views.

..

.. bpo: 33679
.. date: 2018-05-29-07-14-37
.. nonce: MgX_Ui
.. section: IDLE

Enable theme-specific color configuration for Code Context. Use the
Highlights tab to see the setting for built-in themes or add settings to
custom themes.

..

.. bpo: 33642
.. date: 2018-05-24-20-42-44
.. nonce: J0VQbS
.. section: IDLE

Display up to maxlines non-blank lines for Code Context. If there is no
current context, show a single blank line.

..

.. bpo: 33628
.. date: 2018-05-23-19-51-07
.. nonce: sLlFLO
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: Cleanup codecontext.py and its test.

..

.. bpo: 33564
.. date: 2018-05-17-19-41-12
.. nonce: XzHZJe
.. section: IDLE

IDLE's code context now recognizes async as a block opener.

..

.. bpo: 29706
.. date: 2018-05-15-17-01-10
.. nonce: id4H5i
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now colors async and await as keywords in 3.6. They become full
keywords in 3.7.

..

.. bpo: 21474
.. date: 2018-04-29-16-13-02
.. nonce: bglg-F
.. section: IDLE

Update word/identifier definition from ascii to unicode. In text and entry
boxes, this affects selection by double-click, movement left/right by
control-left/right, and deletion left/right by control-BACKSPACE/DEL.

..

.. bpo: 33204
.. date: 2018-04-02-00-28-13
.. nonce: NBsuIv
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: consistently color invalid string prefixes. A 'u' string prefix cannot
be paired with either 'r' or 'f'. Consistently color as much of the prefix,
starting at the right, as is valid. Revise and extend colorizer test.

..

.. bpo: 32831
.. date: 2018-02-12-08-08-45
.. nonce: srDRvU
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings and tests for codecontext.

..

.. bpo: 33189
.. date: 2018-04-03-18-10-00
.. nonce: QrXR00
.. section: Tools/Demos

:program:`pygettext.py` now recognizes only literal strings as docstrings
and translatable strings, and rejects bytes literals and f-string
expressions.

..

.. bpo: 31920
.. date: 2018-03-26-18-54-24
.. nonce: u_WKsT
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed handling directories as arguments in the ``pygettext`` script. Based
on patch by Oleg Krasnikov.

..

.. bpo: 29673
.. date: 2018-03-16-17-25-05
.. nonce: m8QtaW
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix pystackv and pystack gdbinit macros.

..

.. bpo: 32885
.. date: 2018-02-20-12-16-47
.. nonce: dL5x7C
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add an ``-n`` flag for ``Tools/scripts/pathfix.py`` to disbale automatic
backup creation (files with ``~`` suffix).

..

.. bpo: 31583
.. date: 2017-09-26-10-11-21
.. nonce: TM90_H
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix 2to3 for using with --add-suffix option but without --output-dir option
for relative path to files in current directory.

..

.. bpo: 32374
.. date: 2018-01-09-17-03-54
.. nonce: SwwLoz
.. section: C API

Document that m_traverse for multi-phase initialized modules can be called
with m_state=NULL, and add a sanity check
