.. bpo: 20041
.. date: 9253
.. nonce: TypyGp
.. release date: 2016-05-16
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed TypeError when frame.f_trace is set to None. Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 26168
.. date: 9252
.. nonce: -nPBL6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible refleaks in failing Py_BuildValue() with the "N" format unit.

..

.. bpo: 26991
.. date: 9251
.. nonce: yWGNhz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible refleak when creating a function with annotations.

..

.. bpo: 27039
.. date: 9250
.. nonce: oO-wLV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed bytearray.remove() for values greater than 127.  Based on patch by Joe
Jevnik.

..

.. bpo: 23640
.. date: 9249
.. nonce: kvNC4c
.. section: Core and Builtins

int.from_bytes() no longer bypasses constructors for subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 27005
.. date: 9248
.. nonce: ZtcJf-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimized the float.fromhex() class method for exact float. It is now 2
times faster.

..

.. bpo: 18531
.. date: 9247
.. nonce: PkXgtO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Single var-keyword argument of dict subtype was passed unscathed to the
C-defined function.  Now it is converted to exact dict.

..

.. bpo: 26811
.. date: 9246
.. nonce: oNzUWt
.. section: Core and Builtins

gc.get_objects() no longer contains a broken tuple with NULL pointer.

..

.. bpo: 20120
.. date: 9245
.. nonce: c-FZZc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use RawConfigParser for .pypirc parsing, removing support for interpolation
unintentionally added with move to Python 3. Behavior no longer does any
interpolation in .pypirc files, matching behavior in Python 2.7 and
Setuptools 19.0.

..

.. bpo: 26249
.. date: 9244
.. nonce: ZbpWF3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Memory functions of the :c:func:`PyMem_Malloc` domain
(:c:data:`PYMEM_DOMAIN_MEM`) now use the :ref:`pymalloc allocator
<pymalloc>` rather than system :c:func:`malloc`. Applications calling
:c:func:`PyMem_Malloc` without holding the GIL can now crash: use
``PYTHONMALLOC=debug`` environment variable to validate the usage of memory
allocators in your application.

..

.. bpo: 26802
.. date: 9243
.. nonce: hWpU4v
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize function calls only using unpacking like ``func(*tuple)`` (no other
positional argument, no keyword): avoid copying the tuple. Patch written by
Joe Jevnik.

..

.. bpo: 26659
.. date: 9242
.. nonce: 5PRa83
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the builtin slice type support cycle collection.

..

.. bpo: 26718
.. date: 9241
.. nonce: K5PQ8j
.. section: Core and Builtins

super.__init__ no longer leaks memory if called multiple times. NOTE: A
direct call of super.__init__ is not endorsed!

..

.. bpo: 27138
.. date: 9240
.. nonce: ifYEro
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the doc comment for FileFinder.find_spec().

..

.. bpo: 27147
.. date: 9239
.. nonce: tCCgmH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Mention :pep:`420` in the importlib docs.

..

.. bpo: 25339
.. date: 9238
.. nonce: ZcaC2E
.. section: Core and Builtins

PYTHONIOENCODING now has priority over locale in setting the error handler
for stdin and stdout.

..

.. bpo: 26494
.. date: 9237
.. nonce: G6eXIi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on iterating exhausting iterators. Affected classes are generic
sequence iterators, iterators of str, bytes, bytearray, list, tuple, set,
frozenset, dict, OrderedDict, corresponding views and os.scandir() iterator.

..

.. bpo: 26574
.. date: 9236
.. nonce: D2YL_w
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize ``bytes.replace(b'', b'.')`` and ``bytearray.replace(b'', b'.')``.
Patch written by Josh Snider.

..

.. bpo: 26581
.. date: 9235
.. nonce: yNA7nm
.. section: Core and Builtins

If coding cookie is specified multiple times on a line in Python source code
file, only the first one is taken to account.

..

.. bpo: 19711
.. date: 9234
.. nonce: gDDPJE
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add tests for reloading namespace packages.

..

.. bpo: 21099
.. date: 9233
.. nonce: CuMWZJ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Switch applicable importlib tests to use :pep:`451` API.

..

.. bpo: 26563
.. date: 9232
.. nonce: lyrB2Q
.. section: Core and Builtins

Debug hooks on Python memory allocators now raise a fatal error if functions
of the :c:func:`PyMem_Malloc` family are called without holding the GIL.

..

.. bpo: 26564
.. date: 9231
.. nonce: xeRXaz
.. section: Core and Builtins

On error, the debug hooks on Python memory allocators now use the
:mod:`tracemalloc` module to get the traceback where a memory block was
allocated.

..

.. bpo: 26558
.. date: 9230
.. nonce: s05jz7
.. section: Core and Builtins

The debug hooks on Python memory allocator :c:func:`PyObject_Malloc` now
detect when functions are called without holding the GIL.

..

.. bpo: 26516
.. date: 9229
.. nonce: OjekqZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :envvar:`PYTHONMALLOC` environment variable to set the Python memory
allocators and/or install debug hooks.

..

.. bpo: 26516
.. date: 9228
.. nonce: chNJuF
.. section: Core and Builtins

The :c:func:`PyMem_SetupDebugHooks` function can now also be used on Python
compiled in release mode.

..

.. bpo: 26516
.. date: 9227
.. nonce: q7fu1f
.. section: Core and Builtins

The :envvar:`PYTHONMALLOCSTATS` environment variable can now also be used on
Python compiled in release mode. It now has no effect if set to an empty
string.

..

.. bpo: 26516
.. date: 9226
.. nonce: 2k9k6R
.. section: Core and Builtins

In debug mode, debug hooks are now also installed on Python memory
allocators when Python is configured without pymalloc.

..

.. bpo: 26464
.. date: 9225
.. nonce: 7BreGz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix str.translate() when string is ASCII and first replacements removes
character, but next replacement uses a non-ASCII character or a string
longer than 1 character. Regression introduced in Python 3.5.0.

..

.. bpo: 22836
.. date: 9224
.. nonce: cimt1y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure exception reports from PyErr_Display() and PyErr_WriteUnraisable()
are sensible even when formatting them produces secondary errors.  This
affects the reports produced by sys.__excepthook__() and when __del__()
raises an exception.

..

.. bpo: 26302
.. date: 9223
.. nonce: UD9XQt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correct behavior to reject comma as a legal character for cookie names.

..

.. bpo: 26136
.. date: 9222
.. nonce: eZ0t1K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade the warning when a generator raises StopIteration from
PendingDeprecationWarning to DeprecationWarning.  Patch by Anish Shah.

..

.. bpo: 26204
.. date: 9221
.. nonce: x3Zp8E
.. section: Core and Builtins

The compiler now ignores all constant statements: bytes, str, int, float,
complex, name constants (None, False, True), Ellipsis and ast.Constant; not
only str and int. For example, ``1.0`` is now ignored in ``def f(): 1.0``.

..

.. bpo: 4806
.. date: 9220
.. nonce: i9m3hj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid masking the original TypeError exception when using star (``*``)
unpacking in function calls.  Based on patch by Hagen Fürstenau and Daniel
Urban.

..

.. bpo: 26146
.. date: 9219
.. nonce: HKrUth
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new kind of AST node: ``ast.Constant``. It can be used by external AST
optimizers, but the compiler does not emit directly such node.

..

.. bpo: 23601
.. date: 9218
.. nonce: 2E4seG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Sped-up allocation of dict key objects by using Python's small object
allocator.  (Contributed by Julian Taylor.)

..

.. bpo: 18018
.. date: 9217
.. nonce: XKKap3
.. section: Core and Builtins

Import raises ImportError instead of SystemError if a relative import is
attempted without a known parent package.

..

.. bpo: 25843
.. date: 9216
.. nonce: NtJZie
.. section: Core and Builtins

When compiling code, don't merge constants if they are equal but have a
different types. For example, ``f1, f2 = lambda: 1, lambda: 1.0`` is now
correctly compiled to two different functions: ``f1()`` returns ``1``
(``int``) and ``f2()`` returns ``1.0`` (``float``), even if ``1`` and
``1.0`` are equal.

..

.. bpo: 26107
.. date: 9215
.. nonce: q0LBMY
.. section: Core and Builtins

The format of the ``co_lnotab`` attribute of code objects changes to support
negative line number delta.

..

.. bpo: 26154
.. date: 9214
.. nonce: MtnRAH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add a new private _PyThreadState_UncheckedGet() function to get the current
Python thread state, but don't issue a fatal error if it is NULL. This new
function must be used instead of accessing directly the
_PyThreadState_Current variable.  The variable is no more exposed since
Python 3.5.1 to hide the exact implementation of atomic C types, to avoid
compiler issues.

..

.. bpo: 25791
.. date: 9213
.. nonce: gllzPw
.. section: Core and Builtins

If __package__ != __spec__.parent or if neither __package__ or __spec__ are
defined then ImportWarning is raised.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9212
.. nonce: KYNKvs
.. section: Core and Builtins

[UPDATE] Comment out the one of the pickleability tests in
_PyObject_GetState() due to regressions observed in Cython-based projects.

..

.. bpo: 25961
.. date: 9211
.. nonce: Hdjjw0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Disallowed null characters in the type name.

..

.. bpo: 25973
.. date: 9210
.. nonce: Ud__ZP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault when an invalid nonlocal statement binds a name starting with
two underscores.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9209
.. nonce: Wq0E86
.. section: Core and Builtins

Instances of extension types with a state that aren't subclasses of list or
dict and haven't implemented any pickle-related methods (__reduce__,
__reduce_ex__, __getnewargs__, __getnewargs_ex__, or __getstate__), can no
longer be pickled.  Including memoryview.

..

.. bpo: 20440
.. date: 9208
.. nonce: GCwOfH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Massive replacing unsafe attribute setting code with special macro
Py_SETREF.

..

.. bpo: 25766
.. date: 9207
.. nonce: jn93Yu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Special method __bytes__() now works in str subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 25421
.. date: 9206
.. nonce: c47YEL
.. section: Core and Builtins

__sizeof__ methods of builtin types now use dynamic basic size. This allows
sys.getsize() to work correctly with their subclasses with __slots__
defined.

..

.. bpo: 25709
.. date: 9205
.. nonce: WwGm2k
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed problem with in-place string concatenation and utf-8 cache.

..

.. bpo: 5319
.. date: 9204
.. nonce: HxlGwI
.. section: Core and Builtins

New Py_FinalizeEx() API allowing Python to set an exit status of 120 on
failure to flush buffered streams.

..

.. bpo: 25485
.. date: 9203
.. nonce: 9qnaPt
.. section: Core and Builtins

telnetlib.Telnet is now a context manager.

..

.. bpo: 24097
.. date: 9202
.. nonce: Vt4E-i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash in object.__reduce__() if slot name is freed inside __getattr__.

..

.. bpo: 24731
.. date: 9201
.. nonce: h9-hnz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on converting objects with special methods __bytes__, __trunc__,
and __float__ returning instances of subclasses of bytes, int, and float to
subclasses of bytes, int, and float correspondingly.

..

.. bpo: 25630
.. date: 9200
.. nonce: ZxzcoY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible segfault during argument parsing in functions that accept
filesystem paths.

..

.. bpo: 23564
.. date: 9199
.. nonce: XHarGG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a partially broken sanity check in the _posixsubprocess internals
regarding how fds_to_pass were passed to the child.  The bug had no actual
impact as subprocess.py already avoided it.

..

.. bpo: 25388
.. date: 9198
.. nonce: zm3uuQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed tokenizer crash when processing undecodable source code with a null
byte.

..

.. bpo: 25462
.. date: 9197
.. nonce: eXDzgO
.. section: Core and Builtins

The hash of the key now is calculated only once in most operations in C
implementation of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 22995
.. date: 9196
.. nonce: 90kpuP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Default implementation of __reduce__ and __reduce_ex__ now rejects builtin
types with not defined __new__.

..

.. bpo: 24802
.. date: 9195
.. nonce: Qie066
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid buffer overreads when int(), float(), compile(), exec() and eval() are
passed bytes-like objects.  These objects are not necessarily terminated by
a null byte, but the functions assumed they were.

..

.. bpo: 25555
.. date: 9194
.. nonce: MUpG-j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix parser and AST: fill lineno and col_offset of "arg" node when compiling
AST from Python objects.

..

.. bpo: 24726
.. date: 9193
.. nonce: AHk4v2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash and leaking NULL in repr() of OrderedDict that was mutated by
direct calls of dict methods.

..

.. bpo: 25449
.. date: 9192
.. nonce: VqTOFi
.. section: Core and Builtins

Iterating OrderedDict with keys with unstable hash now raises KeyError in C
implementations as well as in Python implementation.

..

.. bpo: 25395
.. date: 9191
.. nonce: htkE3W
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash when highly nested OrderedDict structures were garbage
collected.

..

.. bpo: 25401
.. date: 9190
.. nonce: ofrAtd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize bytes.fromhex() and bytearray.fromhex(): they are now between 2x
and 3.5x faster.

..

.. bpo: 25399
.. date: 9189
.. nonce: dNKIhY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize bytearray % args using the new private _PyBytesWriter API.
Formatting is now between 2.5 and 5 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 25274
.. date: 9188
.. nonce: QCGvAF
.. section: Core and Builtins

sys.setrecursionlimit() now raises a RecursionError if the new recursion
limit is too low depending at the current recursion depth. Modify also the
"lower-water mark" formula to make it monotonic. This mark is used to decide
when the overflowed flag of the thread state is reset.

..

.. bpo: 24402
.. date: 9187
.. nonce: MAgi3X
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix input() to prompt to the redirected stdout when sys.stdout.fileno()
fails.

..

.. bpo: 25349
.. date: 9186
.. nonce: 7lBgJ8
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize bytes % args using the new private _PyBytesWriter API. Formatting
is now up to 2 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 24806
.. date: 9185
.. nonce: Nb0znT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent builtin types that are not allowed to be subclassed from being
subclassed through multiple inheritance.

..

.. bpo: 25301
.. date: 9184
.. nonce: hUTCfr
.. section: Core and Builtins

The UTF-8 decoder is now up to 15 times as fast for error handlers:
``ignore``, ``replace`` and ``surrogateescape``.

..

.. bpo: 24848
.. date: 9183
.. nonce: HlUSuy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a number of bugs in UTF-7 decoding of misformed data.

..

.. bpo: 25267
.. date: 9182
.. nonce: SW8Gs6
.. section: Core and Builtins

The UTF-8 encoder is now up to 75 times as fast for error handlers:
``ignore``, ``replace``, ``surrogateescape``, ``surrogatepass``. Patch
co-written with Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 25280
.. date: 9181
.. nonce: ivTMwd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Import trace messages emitted in verbose (-v) mode are no longer formatted
twice.

..

.. bpo: 25227
.. date: 9180
.. nonce: 19v5rp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize ASCII and latin1 encoders with the ``surrogateescape`` error
handler: the encoders are now up to 3 times as fast. Initial patch written
by Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 25003
.. date: 9179
.. nonce: _ban92
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Solaris 11.3 or newer, os.urandom() now uses the getrandom() function
instead of the getentropy() function. The getentropy() function is blocking
to generate very good quality entropy, os.urandom() doesn't need such
high-quality entropy.

..

.. bpo: 9232
.. date: 9178
.. nonce: pjsmWw
.. section: Core and Builtins

Modify Python's grammar to allow trailing commas in the argument list of a
function declaration.  For example, "def f(\*, a = 3,): pass" is now legal.
Patch from Mark Dickinson.

..

.. bpo: 24965
.. date: 9177
.. nonce: wfyxbB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implement :pep:`498` "Literal String Interpolation". This allows you to embed
expressions inside f-strings, which are converted to normal strings at run
time. Given x=3, then f'value={x}' == 'value=3'. Patch by Eric V. Smith.

..

.. bpo: 26478
.. date: 9176
.. nonce: n0dB8e
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix semantic bugs when using binary operators with dictionary views and
tuples.

..

.. bpo: 26171
.. date: 9175
.. nonce: 8SaQEa
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible integer overflow and heap corruption in zipimporter.get_data().

..

.. bpo: 25660
.. date: 9174
.. nonce: 93DzBo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix TAB key behaviour in REPL with readline.

..

.. bpo: 26288
.. date: 9173
.. nonce: f67RLk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize PyLong_AsDouble.

..

.. bpo: 26289
.. date: 9172
.. nonce: uG9ozG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize floor and modulo division for single-digit longs.  Microbenchmarks
show 2-2.5x improvement.  Built-in 'divmod' function is now also ~10%
faster. (See also: bpo-26315)

..

.. bpo: 25887
.. date: 9171
.. nonce: PtVIX7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise a RuntimeError when a coroutine object is awaited more than once.

..

.. bpo: 27057
.. date: 9170
.. nonce: YzTA_Q
.. section: Library

Fix os.set_inheritable() on Android, ioctl() is blocked by SELinux and fails
with EACCESS. The function now falls back to fcntl(). Patch written by
Michał Bednarski.

..

.. bpo: 27014
.. date: 9169
.. nonce: ui7Khn
.. section: Library

Fix infinite recursion using typing.py.  Thanks to Kalle Tuure!

..

.. bpo: 27031
.. date: 9168
.. nonce: FtvDPs
.. section: Library

Removed dummy methods in Tkinter widget classes: tk_menuBar() and
tk_bindForTraversal().

..

.. bpo: 14132
.. date: 9167
.. nonce: 5wR9MN
.. section: Library

Fix urllib.request redirect handling when the target only has a query
string.  Original fix by Ján Janech.

..

.. bpo: 17214
.. date: 9166
.. nonce: lUbZOV
.. section: Library

The "urllib.request" module now percent-encodes non-ASCII bytes found in
redirect target URLs.  Some servers send Location header fields with
non-ASCII bytes, but "http.client" requires the request target to be
ASCII-encodable, otherwise a UnicodeEncodeError is raised.  Based on patch by
Christian Heimes.

..

.. bpo: 27033
.. date: 9165
.. nonce: o4XIPr
.. section: Library

The default value of the decode_data parameter for smtpd.SMTPChannel and
smtpd.SMTPServer constructors is changed to False.

..

.. bpo: 27034
.. date: 9164
.. nonce: ptzz_S
.. section: Library

Removed deprecated class asynchat.fifo.

..

.. bpo: 26870
.. date: 9163
.. nonce: 5tCUlp
.. section: Library

Added readline.set_auto_history(), which can stop entries being
automatically added to the history list.  Based on patch by Tyler Crompton.

..

.. bpo: 26039
.. date: 9162
.. nonce: JnXjiE
.. section: Library

zipfile.ZipFile.open() can now be used to write data into a ZIP file, as
well as for extracting data.  Patch by Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 26892
.. date: 9161
.. nonce: XIXb0h
.. section: Library

Honor debuglevel flag in urllib.request.HTTPHandler. Patch contributed by
Chi Hsuan Yen.

..

.. bpo: 22274
.. date: 9160
.. nonce: 0RHDMN
.. section: Library

In the subprocess module, allow stderr to be redirected to stdout even when
stdout is not redirected.  Patch by Akira Li.

..

.. bpo: 26807
.. date: 9159
.. nonce: LXSPP6
.. section: Library

mock_open 'files' no longer error on readline at end of file. Patch from
Yolanda Robla.

..

.. bpo: 25745
.. date: 9158
.. nonce: -n8acU
.. section: Library

Fixed leaking a userptr in curses panel destructor.

..

.. bpo: 26977
.. date: 9157
.. nonce: 5G4HtL
.. section: Library

Removed unnecessary, and ignored, call to sum of squares helper in
statistics.pvariance.

..

.. bpo: 26002
.. date: 9156
.. nonce: bVD4pW
.. section: Library

Use bisect in statistics.median instead of a linear search. Patch by Upendra
Kuma.

..

.. bpo: 25974
.. date: 9155
.. nonce: cpOy5R
.. section: Library

Make use of new Decimal.as_integer_ratio() method in statistics module.
Patch by Stefan Krah.

..

.. bpo: 26996
.. date: 9154
.. nonce: LR__VD
.. section: Library

Add secrets module as described in :pep:`506`.

..

.. bpo: 26881
.. date: 9153
.. nonce: mdiq_L
.. section: Library

The modulefinder module now supports extended opcode arguments.

..

.. bpo: 23815
.. date: 9152
.. nonce: _krNe8
.. section: Library

Fixed crashes related to directly created instances of types in _tkinter and
curses.panel modules.

..

.. bpo: 17765
.. date: 9151
.. nonce: hiSVS1
.. section: Library

weakref.ref() no longer silently ignores keyword arguments. Patch by Georg
Brandl.

..

.. bpo: 26873
.. date: 9150
.. nonce: cYXRcH
.. section: Library

xmlrpc now raises ResponseError on unsupported type tags instead of silently
return incorrect result.

..

.. bpo: 26915
.. date: 9149
.. nonce: GoQKUL
.. section: Library

The __contains__ methods in the collections ABCs now check for identity
before checking equality.  This better matches the behavior of the concrete
classes, allows sensible handling of NaNs, and makes it easier to reason
about container invariants.

..

.. bpo: 26711
.. date: 9148
.. nonce: Eu85Qw
.. section: Library

Fixed the comparison of plistlib.Data with other types.

..

.. bpo: 24114
.. date: 9147
.. nonce: RMRMtM
.. section: Library

Fix an uninitialized variable in `ctypes.util`.
The bug only occurs on SunOS when the ctypes implementation searches for the
`crle` program.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.  Tested on SunOS by Kees Bos.

..

.. bpo: 26864
.. date: 9146
.. nonce: 1KgGds
.. section: Library

In urllib.request, change the proxy bypass host checking against no_proxy to
be case-insensitive, and to not match unrelated host names that happen to
have a bypassed hostname as a suffix.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 24902
.. date: 9145
.. nonce: bwWpLj
.. section: Library

Print server URL on http.server startup.  Initial patch by Felix Kaiser.

..

.. bpo: 25788
.. date: 9144
.. nonce: 9weIV5
.. section: Library

fileinput.hook_encoded() now supports an "errors" argument for passing to
open.  Original patch by Joseph Hackman.

..

.. bpo: 26634
.. date: 9143
.. nonce: FZvsSb
.. section: Library

recursive_repr() now sets __qualname__ of wrapper.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26804
.. date: 9142
.. nonce: 9Orp-G
.. section: Library

urllib.request will prefer lower_case proxy environment variables over
UPPER_CASE or Mixed_Case ones. Patch contributed by Hans-Peter Jansen.

..

.. bpo: 26837
.. date: 9141
.. nonce: 2FXGsD
.. section: Library

assertSequenceEqual() now correctly outputs non-stringified differing items
(like bytes in the -b mode).  This affects assertListEqual() and
assertTupleEqual().

..

.. bpo: 26041
.. date: 9140
.. nonce: bVem-p
.. section: Library

Remove "will be removed in Python 3.7" from deprecation messages of
platform.dist() and platform.linux_distribution(). Patch by Kumaripaba
Miyurusara Athukorala.

..

.. bpo: 26822
.. date: 9139
.. nonce: rYSL4W
.. section: Library

itemgetter, attrgetter and methodcaller objects no longer silently ignore
keyword arguments.

..

.. bpo: 26733
.. date: 9138
.. nonce: YxaJmL
.. section: Library

Disassembling a class now disassembles class and static methods. Patch by
Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26801
.. date: 9137
.. nonce: TQGY-7
.. section: Library

Fix error handling in :func:`shutil.get_terminal_size`, catch
:exc:`AttributeError` instead of :exc:`NameError`. Patch written by Emanuel
Barry.

..

.. bpo: 24838
.. date: 9136
.. nonce: 3Pfx8T
.. section: Library

tarfile's ustar and gnu formats now correctly calculate name and link field
limits for multibyte character encodings like utf-8.

..

.. bpo: 26657
.. date: 9135
.. nonce: C_-XFg
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

Fix directory traversal vulnerability with http.server on Windows.  This
fixes a regression that was introduced in 3.3.4rc1 and 3.4.0rc1.  Based on
patch by Philipp Hagemeister.

..

.. bpo: 26717
.. date: 9134
.. nonce: jngTdu
.. section: Library

Stop encoding Latin-1-ized WSGI paths with UTF-8.  Patch by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 26782
.. date: 9133
.. nonce: JWLPrH
.. section: Library

Add STARTUPINFO to subprocess.__all__ on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 26404
.. date: 9132
.. nonce: hXw7Bs
.. section: Library

Add context manager to socketserver.  Patch by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. bpo: 26735
.. date: 9131
.. nonce: riSl3b
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`os.urandom` on Solaris 11.3 and newer when reading more than
1,024 bytes: call ``getrandom()`` multiple times with a limit of 1024 bytes
per call.

..

.. bpo: 26585
.. date: 9130
.. nonce: kfb749
.. section: Library

Eliminate http.server._quote_html() and use html.escape(quote=False).  Patch
by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26685
.. date: 9129
.. nonce: sI_1Ff
.. section: Library

Raise OSError if closing a socket fails.

..

.. bpo: 16329
.. date: 9128
.. nonce: nuXD8W
.. section: Library

Add .webm to mimetypes.types_map.  Patch by Giampaolo Rodola'.

..

.. bpo: 13952
.. date: 9127
.. nonce: SOoTVE
.. section: Library

Add .csv to mimetypes.types_map.  Patch by Geoff Wilson.

..

.. bpo: 26587
.. date: 9126
.. nonce: Qo-B6C
.. section: Library

the site module now allows .pth files to specify files to be added to
sys.path (e.g. zip files).

..

.. bpo: 25609
.. date: 9125
.. nonce: t1ydQM
.. section: Library

Introduce contextlib.AbstractContextManager and typing.ContextManager.

..

.. bpo: 26709
.. date: 9124
.. nonce: luOPbP
.. section: Library

Fixed Y2038 problem in loading binary PLists.

..

.. bpo: 23735
.. date: 9123
.. nonce: Y5oQ9r
.. section: Library

Handle terminal resizing with Readline 6.3+ by installing our own SIGWINCH
handler.  Patch by Eric Price.

..

.. bpo: 25951
.. date: 9122
.. nonce: 1CUASJ
.. section: Library

Change SSLSocket.sendall() to return None, as explicitly documented for
plain socket objects.  Patch by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. bpo: 26586
.. date: 9121
.. nonce: V5pZNa
.. section: Library

In http.server, respond with "413 Request header fields too large" if there
are too many header fields to parse, rather than killing the connection and
raising an unhandled exception.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26676
.. date: 9120
.. nonce: zLRFed
.. section: Library

Added missing XMLPullParser to ElementTree.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 22854
.. date: 9119
.. nonce: K3rMEH
.. section: Library

Change BufferedReader.writable() and BufferedWriter.readable() to always
return False.

..

.. bpo: 26492
.. date: 9118
.. nonce: YN18iz
.. section: Library

Exhausted iterator of array.array now conforms with the behavior of
iterators of other mutable sequences: it lefts exhausted even if iterated
array is extended.

..

.. bpo: 26641
.. date: 9117
.. nonce: 1ICQz0
.. section: Library

doctest.DocFileTest and doctest.testfile() now support packages (module
splitted into multiple directories) for the package parameter.

..

.. bpo: 25195
.. date: 9116
.. nonce: EOc4Po
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in mock.MagicMock. _Call is a subclass of tuple (changeset
3603bae63c13 only works for classes) so we need to implement __ne__
ourselves.  Patch by Andrew Plummer.

..

.. bpo: 26644
.. date: 9115
.. nonce: 7tt1tk
.. section: Library

Raise ValueError rather than SystemError when a negative length is passed to
SSLSocket.recv() or read().

..

.. bpo: 23804
.. date: 9114
.. nonce: PP63Ff
.. section: Library

Fix SSL recv(0) and read(0) methods to return zero bytes instead of up to
1024.

..

.. bpo: 26616
.. date: 9113
.. nonce: v3QwdD
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in datetime.astimezone() method.

..

.. bpo: 26637
.. date: 9112
.. nonce: ttiUf7
.. section: Library

The :mod:`importlib` module now emits an :exc:`ImportError` rather than a
:exc:`TypeError` if :func:`__import__` is tried during the Python shutdown
process but :data:`sys.path` is already cleared (set to ``None``).

..

.. bpo: 21925
.. date: 9111
.. nonce: xFz-hR
.. section: Library

:func:`warnings.formatwarning` now catches exceptions when calling
:func:`linecache.getline` and :func:`tracemalloc.get_object_traceback` to be
able to log :exc:`ResourceWarning` emitted late during the Python shutdown
process.

..

.. bpo: 23848
.. date: 9110
.. nonce: RkKqPi
.. section: Library

On Windows, faulthandler.enable() now also installs an exception handler to
dump the traceback of all Python threads on any Windows exception, not only
on UNIX signals (SIGSEGV, SIGFPE, SIGABRT).

..

.. bpo: 26530
.. date: 9109
.. nonce: RWN1jR
.. section: Library

Add C functions :c:func:`_PyTraceMalloc_Track` and
:c:func:`_PyTraceMalloc_Untrack` to track memory blocks using the
:mod:`tracemalloc` module. Add :c:func:`_PyTraceMalloc_GetTraceback` to get
the traceback of an object.

..

.. bpo: 26588
.. date: 9108
.. nonce: uen0XP
.. section: Library

The _tracemalloc now supports tracing memory allocations of multiple address
spaces (domains).

..

.. bpo: 24266
.. date: 9107
.. nonce: YZgVyM
.. section: Library

Ctrl+C during Readline history search now cancels the search mode when
compiled with Readline 7.

..

.. bpo: 26590
.. date: 9106
.. nonce: qEy91x
.. section: Library

Implement a safe finalizer for the _socket.socket type. It now releases the
GIL to close the socket.

..

.. bpo: 18787
.. date: 9105
.. nonce: rWyzgA
.. section: Library

spwd.getspnam() now raises a PermissionError if the user doesn't have
privileges.

..

.. bpo: 26560
.. date: 9104
.. nonce: A4WXNz
.. section: Library

Avoid potential ValueError in BaseHandler.start_response. Initial patch by
Peter Inglesby.

..

.. bpo: 26567
.. date: 9103
.. nonce: kcC99B
.. section: Library

Add a new function :c:func:`PyErr_ResourceWarning` function to pass the
destroyed object. Add a *source* attribute to
:class:`warnings.WarningMessage`. Add warnings._showwarnmsg() which uses
tracemalloc to get the traceback where source object was allocated.

..

.. bpo: 26313
.. date: 9102
.. nonce: LjZAjy
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

ssl.py _load_windows_store_certs fails if windows cert store is empty. Patch
by Baji.

..

.. bpo: 26569
.. date: 9101
.. nonce: EX8vF1
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`pyclbr.readmodule` and :func:`pyclbr.readmodule_ex` to support
importing packages.

..

.. bpo: 26499
.. date: 9100
.. nonce: NP08PI
.. section: Library

Account for remaining Content-Length in HTTPResponse.readline() and read1().
Based on patch by Silent Ghost. Also document that HTTPResponse now supports
these methods.

..

.. bpo: 25320
.. date: 9099
.. nonce: V96LIy
.. section: Library

Handle sockets in directories unittest discovery is scanning. Patch from
Victor van den Elzen.

..

.. bpo: 16181
.. date: 9098
.. nonce: P7lLvo
.. section: Library

cookiejar.http2time() now returns None if year is higher than
datetime.MAXYEAR.

..

.. bpo: 26513
.. date: 9097
.. nonce: HoPepy
.. section: Library

Fixes platform module detection of Windows Server

..

.. bpo: 23718
.. date: 9096
.. nonce: AMPC0o
.. section: Library

Fixed parsing time in week 0 before Jan 1.  Original patch by Tamás Bence
Gedai.

..

.. bpo: 26323
.. date: 9095
.. nonce: KkZqEj
.. section: Library

Add Mock.assert_called() and Mock.assert_called_once() methods to
unittest.mock. Patch written by Amit Saha.

..

.. bpo: 20589
.. date: 9094
.. nonce: NsQ_I1
.. section: Library

Invoking Path.owner() and Path.group() on Windows now raise
NotImplementedError instead of ImportError.

..

.. bpo: 26177
.. date: 9093
.. nonce: HlSWer
.. section: Library

Fixed the keys() method for Canvas and Scrollbar widgets.

..

.. bpo: 15068
.. date: 9092
.. nonce: xokEVC
.. section: Library

Got rid of excessive buffering in fileinput. The bufsize parameter is now
deprecated and ignored.

..

.. bpo: 19475
.. date: 9091
.. nonce: MH2HH9
.. section: Library

Added an optional argument timespec to the datetime isoformat() method to
choose the precision of the time component.

..

.. bpo: 2202
.. date: 9090
.. nonce: dk9sd0
.. section: Library

Fix UnboundLocalError in AbstractDigestAuthHandler.get_algorithm_impls.
Initial patch by Mathieu Dupuy.

..

.. bpo: 26167
.. date: 9089
.. nonce: 3F-d12
.. section: Library

Minimized overhead in copy.copy() and copy.deepcopy(). Optimized copying and
deepcopying bytearrays, NotImplemented, slices, short lists, tuples, dicts,
sets.

..

.. bpo: 25718
.. date: 9088
.. nonce: 4EjZyv
.. section: Library

Fixed pickling and copying the accumulate() iterator with total is None.

..

.. bpo: 26475
.. date: 9087
.. nonce: JXVccY
.. section: Library

Fixed debugging output for regular expressions with the (?x) flag.

..

.. bpo: 26482
.. date: 9086
.. nonce: d635gW
.. section: Library

Allowed pickling recursive dequeues.

..

.. bpo: 26335
.. date: 9085
.. nonce: iXw5Yb
.. section: Library

Make mmap.write() return the number of bytes written like other write
methods.  Patch by Jakub Stasiak.

..

.. bpo: 26457
.. date: 9084
.. nonce: Xe6Clh
.. section: Library

Fixed the subnets() methods in IP network classes for the case when
resulting prefix length is equal to maximal prefix length. Based on patch by
Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26385
.. date: 9083
.. nonce: 50bDXm
.. section: Library

Remove the file if the internal open() call in NamedTemporaryFile() fails.
Patch by Silent Ghost.

..

.. bpo: 26402
.. date: 9082
.. nonce: k7DVuU
.. section: Library

Fix XML-RPC client to retry when the server shuts down a persistent
connection.  This was a regression related to the new
http.client.RemoteDisconnected exception in 3.5.0a4.

..

.. bpo: 25913
.. date: 9081
.. nonce: 5flb95
.. section: Library

Leading ``<~`` is optional now in base64.a85decode() with adobe=True.  Patch
by Swati Jaiswal.

..

.. bpo: 26186
.. date: 9080
.. nonce: R9rfiL
.. section: Library

Remove an invalid type check in importlib.util.LazyLoader.

..

.. bpo: 26367
.. date: 9079
.. nonce: Qct-9S
.. section: Library

importlib.__import__() raises ImportError like builtins.__import__() when
``level`` is specified but without an accompanying package specified.

..

.. bpo: 26309
.. date: 9078
.. nonce: ubEeiz
.. section: Library

In the "socketserver" module, shut down the request (closing the connected
socket) when verify_request() returns false.  Patch by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. bpo: 23430
.. date: 9077
.. nonce: s_mLiA
.. section: Library

Change the socketserver module to only catch exceptions raised from a
request handler that are derived from Exception (instead of BaseException).
Therefore SystemExit and KeyboardInterrupt no longer trigger the
handle_error() method, and will now to stop a single-threaded server.

..

.. bpo: 25939
.. date: 9076
.. nonce: X49Fqd
.. original section: Library
.. section: Security

On Windows open the cert store readonly in ssl.enum_certificates.

..

.. bpo: 25995
.. date: 9075
.. nonce: NfcimP
.. section: Library

os.walk() no longer uses FDs proportional to the tree depth.

..

.. bpo: 25994
.. date: 9074
.. nonce: ga9rT-
.. section: Library

Added the close() method and the support of the context manager protocol for
the os.scandir() iterator.

..

.. bpo: 23992
.. date: 9073
.. nonce: O0Hhvc
.. section: Library

multiprocessing: make MapResult not fail-fast upon exception.

..

.. bpo: 26243
.. date: 9072
.. nonce: 41WSpF
.. section: Library

Support keyword arguments to zlib.compress().  Patch by Aviv Palivoda.

..

.. bpo: 26117
.. date: 9071
.. nonce: ne6p11
.. section: Library

The os.scandir() iterator now closes file descriptor not only when the
iteration is finished, but when it was failed with error.

..

.. bpo: 25949
.. date: 9070
.. nonce: -Lh9vz
.. section: Library

__dict__ for an OrderedDict instance is now created only when needed.

..

.. bpo: 25911
.. date: 9069
.. nonce: d4Zadh
.. section: Library

Restored support of bytes paths in os.walk() on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 26045
.. date: 9068
.. nonce: WmzUrX
.. section: Library

Add UTF-8 suggestion to error message when posting a non-Latin-1 string with
http.client.

..

.. bpo: 26039
.. date: 9067
.. nonce: a5Bxm4
.. section: Library

Added zipfile.ZipInfo.from_file() and zipinfo.ZipInfo.is_dir(). Patch by
Thomas Kluyver.

..

.. bpo: 12923
.. date: 9066
.. nonce: HPAu-B
.. section: Library

Reset FancyURLopener's redirect counter even if there is an exception.
Based on patches by Brian Brazil and Daniel Rocco.

..

.. bpo: 25945
.. date: 9065
.. nonce: guNgNM
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash when unpickle the functools.partial object with wrong state.
Fixed a leak in failed functools.partial constructor. "args" and "keywords"
attributes of functools.partial have now always types tuple and dict
correspondingly.

..

.. bpo: 26202
.. date: 9064
.. nonce: LPIXLg
.. section: Library

copy.deepcopy() now correctly copies range() objects with non-atomic
attributes.

..

.. bpo: 23076
.. date: 9063
.. nonce: 8rphoP
.. section: Library

Path.glob() now raises a ValueError if it's called with an invalid pattern.
Patch by Thomas Nyberg.

..

.. bpo: 19883
.. date: 9062
.. nonce: z9TsO6
.. section: Library

Fixed possible integer overflows in zipimport.

..

.. bpo: 26227
.. date: 9061
.. nonce: Fe6oiB
.. section: Library

On Windows, getnameinfo(), gethostbyaddr() and gethostbyname_ex() functions
of the socket module now decode the hostname from the ANSI code page rather
than UTF-8.

..

.. bpo: 26099
.. date: 9060
.. nonce: CH5jer
.. section: Library

The site module now writes an error into stderr if sitecustomize module can
be imported but executing the module raise an ImportError. Same change for
usercustomize.

..

.. bpo: 26147
.. date: 9059
.. nonce: i-Jc01
.. section: Library

xmlrpc now works with strings not encodable with used non-UTF-8 encoding.

..

.. bpo: 25935
.. date: 9058
.. nonce: cyni91
.. section: Library

Garbage collector now breaks reference loops with OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 16620
.. date: 9057
.. nonce: rxpn_Y
.. section: Library

Fixed AttributeError in msilib.Directory.glob().

..

.. bpo: 26013
.. date: 9056
.. nonce: 93RKNz
.. section: Library

Added compatibility with broken protocol 2 pickles created in old Python 3
versions (3.4.3 and lower).

..

.. bpo: 26129
.. date: 9055
.. nonce: g4RQZd
.. section: Library

Deprecated accepting non-integers in grp.getgrgid().

..

.. bpo: 25850
.. date: 9054
.. nonce: jwFPxj
.. section: Library

Use cross-compilation by default for 64-bit Windows.

..

.. bpo: 25822
.. date: 9053
.. nonce: 0Eafyi
.. section: Library

Add docstrings to the fields of urllib.parse results. Patch contributed by
Swati Jaiswal.

..

.. bpo: 22642
.. date: 9052
.. nonce: PEgS9F
.. section: Library

Convert trace module option parsing mechanism to argparse. Patch contributed
by SilentGhost.

..

.. bpo: 24705
.. date: 9051
.. nonce: IZYwjR
.. section: Library

Fix sysconfig._parse_makefile not expanding ${} vars appearing before $()
vars.

..

.. bpo: 26069
.. date: 9050
.. nonce: NaF4lN
.. section: Library

Remove the deprecated apis in the trace module.

..

.. bpo: 22138
.. date: 9049
.. nonce: nRNYkc
.. section: Library

Fix mock.patch behavior when patching descriptors. Restore original values
after patching. Patch contributed by Sean McCully.

..

.. bpo: 25672
.. date: 9048
.. nonce: fw9RJP
.. section: Library

In the ssl module, enable the SSL_MODE_RELEASE_BUFFERS mode option if it is
safe to do so.

..

.. bpo: 26012
.. date: 9047
.. nonce: IFSXNm
.. section: Library

Don't traverse into symlinks for ``**`` pattern in pathlib.Path.[r]glob().

..

.. bpo: 24120
.. date: 9046
.. nonce: Yiwa0h
.. section: Library

Ignore PermissionError when traversing a tree with pathlib.Path.[r]glob().
Patch by Ulrich Petri.

..

.. bpo: 21815
.. date: 9045
.. nonce: h7-UY8
.. section: Library

Accept ] characters in the data portion of imap responses, in order to
handle the flags with square brackets accepted and produced by servers such
as gmail.

..

.. bpo: 25447
.. date: 9044
.. nonce: -4m4xO
.. section: Library

fileinput now uses sys.stdin as-is if it does not have a buffer attribute
(restores backward compatibility).

..

.. bpo: 25971
.. date: 9043
.. nonce: vhMeG0
.. section: Library

Optimized creating Fractions from floats by 2 times and from Decimals by 3
times.

..

.. bpo: 25802
.. date: 9042
.. nonce: Y2KOnA
.. section: Library

Document as deprecated the remaining implementations of
importlib.abc.Loader.load_module().

..

.. bpo: 25928
.. date: 9041
.. nonce: JsQfKK
.. section: Library

Add Decimal.as_integer_ratio().

..

.. bpo: 25447
.. date: 9040
.. nonce: ajPRDy
.. section: Library

Copying the lru_cache() wrapper object now always works, independently from
the type of the wrapped object (by returning the original object unchanged).

..

.. bpo: 25768
.. date: 9039
.. nonce: GDj2ip
.. section: Library

Have the functions in compileall return booleans instead of ints and add
proper documentation and tests for the return values.

..

.. bpo: 24103
.. date: 9038
.. nonce: WufqrQ
.. section: Library

Fixed possible use after free in ElementTree.XMLPullParser.

..

.. bpo: 25860
.. date: 9037
.. nonce: 0hActb
.. section: Library

os.fwalk() no longer skips remaining directories when error occurs.
Original patch by Samson Lee.

..

.. bpo: 25914
.. date: 9036
.. nonce: h0V61F
.. section: Library

Fixed and simplified OrderedDict.__sizeof__.

..

.. bpo: 25869
.. date: 9035
.. nonce: eAnRH5
.. section: Library

Optimized deepcopying ElementTree; it is now 20 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 25873
.. date: 9034
.. nonce: L4Fgjm
.. section: Library

Optimized iterating ElementTree.  Iterating elements Element.iter() is now
40% faster, iterating text Element.itertext() is now up to 2.5 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 25902
.. date: 9033
.. nonce: 6t2FmH
.. section: Library

Fixed various refcount issues in ElementTree iteration.

..

.. bpo: 22227
.. date: 9032
.. nonce: 5utM-Q
.. section: Library

The TarFile iterator is reimplemented using generator. This implementation
is simpler that using class.

..

.. bpo: 25638
.. date: 9031
.. nonce: yitRj4
.. section: Library

Optimized ElementTree.iterparse(); it is now 2x faster. Optimized
ElementTree parsing; it is now 10% faster.

..

.. bpo: 25761
.. date: 9030
.. nonce: JGgMOP
.. section: Library

Improved detecting errors in broken pickle data.

..

.. bpo: 25717
.. date: 9029
.. nonce: 0_xjaK
.. section: Library

Restore the previous behaviour of tolerating most fstat() errors when
opening files.  This was a regression in 3.5a1, and stopped anonymous
temporary files from working in special cases.

..

.. bpo: 24903
.. date: 9028
.. nonce: 3LBdzb
.. section: Library

Fix regression in number of arguments compileall accepts when '-d' is
specified.  The check on the number of arguments has been dropped completely
as it never worked correctly anyway.

..

.. bpo: 25764
.. date: 9027
.. nonce: 7WWG07
.. section: Library

In the subprocess module, preserve any exception caused by fork() failure
when preexec_fn is used.

..

.. bpo: 25771
.. date: 9026
.. nonce: It-7Qf
.. section: Library

Tweak the exception message for importlib.util.resolve_name() when 'package'
isn't specified but necessary.

..

.. bpo: 6478
.. date: 9025
.. nonce: -Bi9Hb
.. section: Library

_strptime's regexp cache now is reset after changing timezone with
time.tzset().

..

.. bpo: 14285
.. date: 9024
.. nonce: UyG8Hj
.. section: Library

When executing a package with the "python -m package" option, and package
initialization fails, a proper traceback is now reported.  The "runpy"
module now lets exceptions from package initialization pass back to the
caller, rather than raising ImportError.

..

.. bpo: 19771
.. date: 9023
.. nonce: 5NG-bg
.. section: Library

Also in runpy and the "-m" option, omit the irrelevant message ". . . is a
package and cannot be directly executed" if the package could not even be
initialized (e.g. due to a bad ``*.pyc`` file).

..

.. bpo: 25177
.. date: 9022
.. nonce: aNR4Ha
.. section: Library

Fixed problem with the mean of very small and very large numbers. As a side
effect, statistics.mean and statistics.variance should be significantly
faster.

..

.. bpo: 25718
.. date: 9021
.. nonce: D9mHZF
.. section: Library

Fixed copying object with state with boolean value is false.

..

.. bpo: 10131
.. date: 9020
.. nonce: a7tptz
.. section: Library

Fixed deep copying of minidom documents.  Based on patch by Marian Ganisin.

..

.. bpo: 7990
.. date: 9019
.. nonce: fpvQxH
.. section: Library

dir() on ElementTree.Element now lists properties: "tag", "text", "tail" and
"attrib".  Original patch by Santoso Wijaya.

..

.. bpo: 25725
.. date: 9018
.. nonce: XIKv3R
.. section: Library

Fixed a reference leak in pickle.loads() when unpickling invalid data
including tuple instructions.

..

.. bpo: 25663
.. date: 9017
.. nonce: Ofwfqa
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, avoid listing duplicate global names, and search
the global namespace before searching builtins.

..

.. bpo: 25688
.. date: 9016
.. nonce: 8P1HOv
.. section: Library

Fixed file leak in ElementTree.iterparse() raising an error.

..

.. bpo: 23914
.. date: 9015
.. nonce: 1sEz4J
.. section: Library

Fixed SystemError raised by unpickler on broken pickle data.

..

.. bpo: 25691
.. date: 9014
.. nonce: ZEaapY
.. section: Library

Fixed crash on deleting ElementTree.Element attributes.

..

.. bpo: 25624
.. date: 9013
.. nonce: ed-fM0
.. section: Library

ZipFile now always writes a ZIP_STORED header for directory entries.  Patch
by Dingyuan Wang.

..

.. bpo: 25626
.. date: 9012
.. nonce: TQ3fvb
.. section: Library

Change three zlib functions to accept sizes that fit in Py_ssize_t, but
internally cap those sizes to UINT_MAX.  This resolves a regression in 3.5
where GzipFile.read() failed to read chunks larger than 2 or 4 GiB.  The
change affects the zlib.Decompress.decompress() max_length parameter, the
zlib.decompress() bufsize parameter, and the zlib.Decompress.flush() length
parameter.

..

.. bpo: 25583
.. date: 9011
.. nonce: Gk-cim
.. section: Library

Avoid incorrect errors raised by os.makedirs(exist_ok=True) when the OS
gives priority to errors such as EACCES over EEXIST.

..

.. bpo: 25593
.. date: 9010
.. nonce: 56uegI
.. section: Library

Change semantics of EventLoop.stop() in asyncio.

..

.. bpo: 6973
.. date: 9009
.. nonce: nl5cHt
.. section: Library

When we know a subprocess.Popen process has died, do not allow the
send_signal(), terminate(), or kill() methods to do anything as they could
potentially signal a different process.

..

.. bpo: 23883
.. date: 9008
.. nonce: OQS5sS
.. section: Library

Added missing APIs to __all__ to match the documented APIs for the following
modules: calendar, csv, enum, fileinput, ftplib, logging, optparse, tarfile,
threading and wave.  Also added a test.support.check__all__() helper.
Patches by Jacek Kołodziej, Mauro S. M. Rodrigues and Joel Taddei.

..

.. bpo: 25590
.. date: 9007
.. nonce: KPcnfv
.. section: Library

In the Readline completer, only call getattr() once per attribute.  Also
complete names of attributes such as properties and slots which are listed
by dir() but not yet created on an instance.

..

.. bpo: 25498
.. date: 9006
.. nonce: AvqEBl
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when garbage-collecting ctypes objects created by wrapping a
memoryview.  This was a regression made in 3.5a1.  Based on patch by
Eryksun.

..

.. bpo: 25584
.. date: 9005
.. nonce: 124mYw
.. section: Library

Added "escape" to the __all__ list in the glob module.

..

.. bpo: 25584
.. date: 9004
.. nonce: ZeWX0J
.. section: Library

Fixed recursive glob() with patterns starting with ``**``.

..

.. bpo: 25446
.. date: 9003
.. nonce: k1DByx
.. section: Library

Fix regression in smtplib's AUTH LOGIN support.

..

.. bpo: 18010
.. date: 9002
.. nonce: Azyf1C
.. section: Library

Fix the pydoc web server's module search function to handle exceptions from
importing packages.

..

.. bpo: 25554
.. date: 9001
.. nonce: UM9MlR
.. section: Library

Got rid of circular references in regular expression parsing.

..

.. bpo: 18973
.. date: 9000
.. nonce: Am9jFL
.. section: Library

Command-line interface of the calendar module now uses argparse instead of
optparse.

..

.. bpo: 25510
.. date: 8999
.. nonce: 79g7LA
.. section: Library

fileinput.FileInput.readline() now returns b'' instead of '' at the end if
the FileInput was opened with binary mode. Patch by Ryosuke Ito.

..

.. bpo: 25503
.. date: 8998
.. nonce: Zea0Y7
.. section: Library

Fixed inspect.getdoc() for inherited docstrings of properties. Original
patch by John Mark Vandenberg.

..

.. bpo: 25515
.. date: 8997
.. nonce: fQsyYG
.. section: Library

Always use os.urandom as a source of randomness in uuid.uuid4.

..

.. bpo: 21827
.. date: 8996
.. nonce: k2oreR
.. section: Library

Fixed textwrap.dedent() for the case when largest common whitespace is a
substring of smallest leading whitespace. Based on patch by Robert Li.

..

.. bpo: 25447
.. date: 8995
.. nonce: eDYc4t
.. section: Library

The lru_cache() wrapper objects now can be copied and pickled (by returning
the original object unchanged).

..

.. bpo: 25390
.. date: 8994
.. nonce: 6mSgRq
.. section: Library

typing: Don't crash on Union[str, Pattern].

..

.. bpo: 25441
.. date: 8993
.. nonce: d7zph6
.. section: Library

asyncio: Raise error from drain() when socket is closed.

..

.. bpo: 25410
.. date: 8992
.. nonce: QAs_3B
.. section: Library

Cleaned up and fixed minor bugs in C implementation of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 25411
.. date: 8991
.. nonce: qsJTCb
.. section: Library

Improved Unicode support in SMTPHandler through better use of the email
package. Thanks to user simon04 for the patch.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8990
.. nonce: pFHJ0i
.. section: Library

Move the imp module from a PendingDeprecationWarning to DeprecationWarning.

..

.. bpo: 25407
.. date: 8989
.. nonce: ukNt1D
.. section: Library

Remove mentions of the formatter module being removed in Python 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 25406
.. date: 8988
.. nonce: 5MZKU_
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in C implementation of OrderedDict.move_to_end() that caused
segmentation fault or hang in iterating after moving several items to the
start of ordered dict.

..

.. bpo: 25382
.. date: 8987
.. nonce: XQ44yE
.. section: Library

pickletools.dis() now outputs implicit memo index for the MEMOIZE opcode.

..

.. bpo: 25357
.. date: 8986
.. nonce: ebqGy-
.. section: Library

Add an optional newline parameter to binascii.b2a_base64(). base64.b64encode()
uses it to avoid a memory copy.

..

.. bpo: 24164
.. date: 8985
.. nonce: oi6H3E
.. section: Library

Objects that need calling ``__new__`` with keyword arguments, can now be
pickled using pickle protocols older than protocol version 4.

..

.. bpo: 25364
.. date: 8984
.. nonce: u_1Wi6
.. section: Library

zipfile now works in threads disabled builds.

..

.. bpo: 25328
.. date: 8983
.. nonce: Rja1Xg
.. section: Library

smtpd's SMTPChannel now correctly raises a ValueError if both decode_data
and enable_SMTPUTF8 are set to true.

..

.. bpo: 16099
.. date: 8982
.. nonce: _MTt3k
.. section: Library

RobotFileParser now supports Crawl-delay and Request-rate extensions.  Patch
by Nikolay Bogoychev.

..

.. bpo: 25316
.. date: 8981
.. nonce: dHQHWI
.. section: Library

distutils raises OSError instead of DistutilsPlatformError when MSVC is not
installed.

..

.. bpo: 25380
.. date: 8980
.. nonce: sKZ6-I
.. section: Library

Fixed protocol for the STACK_GLOBAL opcode in pickletools.opcodes.

..

.. bpo: 23972
.. date: 8979
.. nonce: s2g30g
.. section: Library

Updates asyncio datagram create method allowing reuseport and reuseaddr
socket options to be set prior to binding the socket. Mirroring the existing
asyncio create_server method the reuseaddr option for datagram sockets
defaults to True if the O/S is 'posix' (except if the platform is Cygwin).
Patch by Chris Laws.

..

.. bpo: 25304
.. date: 8978
.. nonce: CsmLyI
.. section: Library

Add asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe().  This lets you submit a coroutine to
a loop from another thread, returning a concurrent.futures.Future.  By
Vincent Michel.

..

.. bpo: 25232
.. date: 8977
.. nonce: KhKjCE
.. section: Library

Fix CGIRequestHandler to split the query from the URL at the first question
mark (?) rather than the last. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 24657
.. date: 8976
.. nonce: h2Ag7y
.. section: Library

Prevent CGIRequestHandler from collapsing slashes in the query part of the
URL as if it were a path. Patch from Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 25287
.. date: 8975
.. nonce: KhzzMW
.. section: Library

Don't add crypt.METHOD_CRYPT to crypt.methods if it's not supported. Check
if it is supported, it may not be supported on OpenBSD for example.

..

.. bpo: 23600
.. date: 8974
.. nonce: 7J_RD5
.. section: Library

Default implementation of tzinfo.fromutc() was returning wrong results in
some cases.

..

.. bpo: 25203
.. date: 8973
.. nonce: IgDEbt
.. section: Library

Failed readline.set_completer_delims() no longer left the module in
inconsistent state.

..

.. bpo: 25011
.. date: 8972
.. nonce: VcaCd6
.. section: Library

rlcompleter now omits private and special attribute names unless the prefix
starts with underscores.

..

.. bpo: 25209
.. date: 8971
.. nonce: WxKcdJ
.. section: Library

rlcompleter now can add a space or a colon after completed keyword.

..

.. bpo: 22241
.. date: 8970
.. nonce: a-Mtw2
.. section: Library

timezone.utc name is now plain 'UTC', not 'UTC-00:00'.

..

.. bpo: 23517
.. date: 8969
.. nonce: 0ABp8q
.. section: Library

fromtimestamp() and utcfromtimestamp() methods of datetime.datetime now
round microseconds to nearest with ties going to nearest even integer
(ROUND_HALF_EVEN), as round(float), instead of rounding towards -Infinity
(ROUND_FLOOR).

..

.. bpo: 23552
.. date: 8968
.. nonce: I0T-M-
.. section: Library

Timeit now warns when there is substantial (4x) variance between best and
worst times. Patch from Serhiy Storchaka.

..

.. bpo: 24633
.. date: 8967
.. nonce: 6Unn9B
.. section: Library

site-packages/README -> README.txt.

..

.. bpo: 24879
.. date: 8966
.. nonce: YUzg_z
.. section: Library

help() and pydoc can now list named tuple fields in the order they were
defined rather than alphabetically.  The ordering is determined by the
_fields attribute if present.

..

.. bpo: 24874
.. date: 8965
.. nonce: luBfgA
.. section: Library

Improve speed of itertools.cycle() and make its pickle more compact.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8964
.. nonce: mD-_3v
.. section: Library

Fix crash in itertools.cycle.__setstate__() when the first argument wasn't a
list.

..

.. bpo: 20059
.. date: 8963
.. nonce: SHv0Ji
.. section: Library

urllib.parse raises ValueError on all invalid ports. Patch by Martin Panter.

..

.. bpo: 24360
.. date: 8962
.. nonce: 5RwH-e
.. section: Library

Improve __repr__ of argparse.Namespace() for invalid identifiers.  Patch by
Matthias Bussonnier.

..

.. bpo: 23426
.. date: 8961
.. nonce: PUV-Cx
.. section: Library

run_setup was broken in distutils. Patch from Alexander Belopolsky.

..

.. bpo: 13938
.. date: 8960
.. nonce: e5NSE1
.. section: Library

2to3 converts StringTypes to a tuple. Patch from Mark Hammond.

..

.. bpo: 2091
.. date: 8959
.. nonce: bp56pO
.. section: Library

open() accepted a 'U' mode string containing '+', but 'U' can only be used
with 'r'. Patch from Jeff Balogh and John O'Connor.

..

.. bpo: 8585
.. date: 8958
.. nonce: 78hPc2
.. section: Library

improved tests for zipimporter2. Patch from Mark Lawrence.

..

.. bpo: 18622
.. date: 8957
.. nonce: i6nCCW
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.mock_open().reset_mock would recurse infinitely. Patch from
Nicola Palumbo and Laurent De Buyst.

..

.. bpo: 24426
.. date: 8956
.. nonce: yCtQfT
.. section: Library

Fast searching optimization in regular expressions now works for patterns
that starts with capturing groups.  Fast searching optimization now can't be
disabled at compile time.

..

.. bpo: 23661
.. date: 8955
.. nonce: 5VHJmh
.. section: Library

unittest.mock side_effects can now be exceptions again. This was a
regression vs Python 3.4. Patch from Ignacio Rossi

..

.. bpo: 13248
.. date: 8954
.. nonce: SA2hvu
.. section: Library

Remove deprecated inspect.getmoduleinfo function.

..

.. bpo: 25578
.. date: 8953
.. nonce: G6S-ft
.. section: Library

Fix (another) memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercer().

..

.. bpo: 25530
.. date: 8952
.. nonce: hDFkwu
.. section: Library

Disable the vulnerable SSLv3 protocol by default when creating
ssl.SSLContext.

..

.. bpo: 25569
.. date: 8951
.. nonce: CfvQjK
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak in SSLSocket.getpeercert().

..

.. bpo: 25471
.. date: 8950
.. nonce: T0A02M
.. section: Library

Sockets returned from accept() shouldn't appear to be nonblocking.

..

.. bpo: 25319
.. date: 8949
.. nonce: iyuglv
.. section: Library

When threading.Event is reinitialized, the underlying condition should use a
regular lock rather than a recursive lock.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8948
.. nonce: rtZyid
.. section: Library

Skip getaddrinfo if host is already resolved. Patch by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 26050
.. date: 8947
.. nonce: sclyvk
.. section: Library

Add asyncio.StreamReader.readuntil() method. Patch by Марк Коренберг.

..

.. bpo: 25924
.. date: 8946
.. nonce: Uxr2vt
.. section: Library

Avoid unnecessary serialization of getaddrinfo(3) calls on OS X versions
10.5 or higher.  Original patch by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 26406
.. date: 8945
.. nonce: ihvhF4
.. section: Library

Avoid unnecessary serialization of getaddrinfo(3) calls on current versions
of OpenBSD and NetBSD.  Patch by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis.

..

.. bpo: 26848
.. date: 8944
.. nonce: ChBOpQ
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio/subprocess.communicate() to handle empty input. Patch by Jack
O'Connor.

..

.. bpo: 27040
.. date: 8943
.. nonce: UASyCC
.. section: Library

Add loop.get_exception_handler method

..

.. bpo: 27041
.. date: 8942
.. nonce: p3893U
.. section: Library

asyncio: Add loop.create_future method

..

.. bpo: 20640
.. date: 8941
.. nonce: PmI-G8
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for idlelib.configHelpSourceEdit. Patch by Saimadhav Heblikar.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8940
.. nonce: _YJfG7
.. section: IDLE

In the 'IDLE-console differences' section of the IDLE doc, clarify how
running with IDLE affects sys.modules and the standard streams.

..

.. bpo: 25507
.. date: 8939
.. nonce: i8bNpk
.. section: IDLE

fix incorrect change in IOBinding that prevented printing. Augment IOBinding
htest to include all major IOBinding functions.

..

.. bpo: 25905
.. date: 8938
.. nonce: FzNb3B
.. section: IDLE

Revert unwanted conversion of ' to ’ RIGHT SINGLE QUOTATION MARK in
README.txt and open this and NEWS.txt with 'ascii'. Re-encode CREDITS.txt to
utf-8 and open it with 'utf-8'.

..

.. bpo: 15348
.. date: 8937
.. nonce: d1Fg01
.. section: IDLE

Stop the debugger engine (normally in a user process) before closing the
debugger window (running in the IDLE process). This prevents the
RuntimeErrors that were being caught and ignored.

..

.. bpo: 24455
.. date: 8936
.. nonce: x6YqtE
.. section: IDLE

Prevent IDLE from hanging when a) closing the shell while the debugger is
active (15347); b) closing the debugger with the [X] button (15348); and c)
activating the debugger when already active (24455). The patch by Mark
Roseman does this by making two changes. 1. Suspend and resume the
gui.interaction method with the tcl vwait mechanism intended for this
purpose (instead of root.mainloop & .quit). 2. In gui.run, allow any
existing interaction to terminate first.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8935
.. nonce: Yp9LRY
.. section: IDLE

Change 'The program' to 'Your program' in an IDLE 'kill program?' message to
make it clearer that the program referred to is the currently running user
program, not IDLE itself.

..

.. bpo: 24750
.. date: 8934
.. nonce: xgsi-K
.. section: IDLE

Improve the appearance of the IDLE editor window status bar. Patch by Mark
Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25313
.. date: 8933
.. nonce: xMXHpO
.. section: IDLE

Change the handling of new built-in text color themes to better address the
compatibility problem introduced by the addition of IDLE Dark. Consistently
use the revised idleConf.CurrentTheme everywhere in idlelib.

..

.. bpo: 24782
.. date: 8932
.. nonce: RgIPYE
.. section: IDLE

Extension configuration is now a tab in the IDLE Preferences dialog rather
than a separate dialog.  The former tabs are now a sorted list.  Patch by
Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 22726
.. date: 8931
.. nonce: x8T0dA
.. section: IDLE

Re-activate the config dialog help button with some content about the other
buttons and the new IDLE Dark theme.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 8930
.. nonce: TFPJhr
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now has an 'IDLE Dark' built-in text color theme. It is more or less
IDLE Classic inverted, with a cobalt blue background. Strings, comments,
keywords, ... are still green, red, orange, ... . To use it with IDLEs
released before November 2015, hit the 'Save as New Custom Theme' button and
enter a new name, such as 'Custom Dark'.  The custom theme will work with
any IDLE release, and can be modified.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 8929
.. nonce: 5Llwo4
.. section: IDLE

README.txt is now an idlelib index for IDLE developers and curious users.
The previous user content is now in the IDLE doc chapter. 'IDLE' now means
'Integrated Development and Learning Environment'.

..

.. bpo: 24820
.. date: 8928
.. nonce: ZUz9Fn
.. section: IDLE

Users can now set breakpoint colors in Settings -> Custom Highlighting.
Original patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24972
.. date: 8927
.. nonce: uc0uNo
.. section: IDLE

Inactive selection background now matches active selection background, as
configured by users, on all systems.  Found items are now always highlighted
on Windows.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24570
.. date: 8926
.. nonce: s3EkNn
.. section: IDLE

Idle: make calltip and completion boxes appear on Macs affected by a tk
regression.  Initial patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24988
.. date: 8925
.. nonce: tXqq4T
.. section: IDLE

Idle ScrolledList context menus (used in debugger) now work on Mac Aqua.
Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 24801
.. date: 8924
.. nonce: -bj_Ou
.. section: IDLE

Make right-click for context menu work on Mac Aqua. Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25173
.. date: 8923
.. nonce: EZzrPg
.. section: IDLE

Associate tkinter messageboxes with a specific widget. For Mac OSX, make
them a 'sheet'.  Patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 25198
.. date: 8922
.. nonce: -j_BV7
.. section: IDLE

Enhance the initial html viewer now used for Idle Help. Properly indent
fixed-pitch text (patch by Mark Roseman). Give code snippet a very
Sphinx-like light blueish-gray background. Re-use initial width and height set by
users for shell and editor. When the Table of Contents (TOC) menu is used,
put the section header at the top of the screen.

..

.. bpo: 25225
.. date: 8921
.. nonce: 9pvdq6
.. section: IDLE

Condense and rewrite Idle doc section on text colors.

..

.. bpo: 21995
.. date: 8920
.. nonce: C5Rmzx
.. section: IDLE

Explain some differences between IDLE and console Python.

..

.. bpo: 22820
.. date: 8919
.. nonce: hix_8X
.. section: IDLE

Explain need for *print* when running file from Idle editor.

..

.. bpo: 25224
.. date: 8918
.. nonce: UVMYQq
.. section: IDLE

Doc: augment Idle feature list and no-subprocess section.

..

.. bpo: 25219
.. date: 8917
.. nonce: 8_9DYg
.. section: IDLE

Update doc for Idle command line options. Some were missing and notes were
not correct.

..

.. bpo: 24861
.. date: 8916
.. nonce: Ecg2yT
.. section: IDLE

Most of idlelib is private and subject to change. Use idleib.idle.* to start
Idle. See idlelib.__init__.__doc__.

..

.. bpo: 25199
.. date: 8915
.. nonce: ih7yY3
.. section: IDLE

Idle: add synchronization comments for future maintainers.

..

.. bpo: 16893
.. date: 8914
.. nonce: uIi1oB
.. section: IDLE

Replace help.txt with help.html for Idle doc display. The new
idlelib/help.html is rstripped Doc/build/html/library/idle.html. It looks
better than help.txt and will better document Idle as released. The tkinter
html viewer that works for this file was written by Rose Roseman. The now
unused EditorWindow.HelpDialog class and helt.txt file are deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 24199
.. date: 8913
.. nonce: VKnZEv
.. section: IDLE

Deprecate unused idlelib.idlever with possible removal in 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 24790
.. date: 8912
.. nonce: hD1hlj
.. section: IDLE

Remove extraneous code (which also create 2 & 3 conflicts).

..

.. bpo: 26736
.. date: 8911
.. nonce: U_Hyqo
.. section: Documentation

Used HTTPS for external links in the documentation if possible.

..

.. bpo: 6953
.. date: 8910
.. nonce: Zk6rno
.. section: Documentation

Rework the Readline module documentation to group related functions
together, and add more details such as what underlying Readline functions
and variables are accessed.

..

.. bpo: 23606
.. date: 8909
.. nonce: 9MhIso
.. section: Documentation

Adds note to ctypes documentation regarding cdll.msvcrt.

..

.. bpo: 24952
.. date: 8908
.. nonce: RHhFPE
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the default size argument of stack_size() in the "threading" and
"_thread" modules. Patch from Mattip.

..

.. bpo: 26014
.. date: 8907
.. nonce: ptdZ_I
.. section: Documentation

Update 3.x packaging documentation: * "See also" links to the new docs are
now provided in the legacy pages * links to setuptools documentation have
been updated

..

.. bpo: 21916
.. date: 8906
.. nonce: muwCyp
.. section: Tests

Added tests for the turtle module.  Patch by ingrid, Gregory Loyse and Jelle
Zijlstra.

..

.. bpo: 26295
.. date: 8905
.. nonce: sYBtj5
.. section: Tests

When using "python3 -m test --testdir=TESTDIR", regrtest doesn't add "test."
prefix to test module names.

..

.. bpo: 26523
.. date: 8904
.. nonce: em_Uzt
.. section: Tests

The multiprocessing thread pool (multiprocessing.dummy.Pool) was untested.

..

.. bpo: 26015
.. date: 8903
.. nonce: p3oWK3
.. section: Tests

Added new tests for pickling iterators of mutable sequences.

..

.. bpo: 26325
.. date: 8902
.. nonce: KOUc82
.. section: Tests

Added test.support.check_no_resource_warning() to check that no
ResourceWarning is emitted.

..

.. bpo: 25940
.. date: 8901
.. nonce: MvBwSe
.. section: Tests

Changed test_ssl to use its internal local server more.  This avoids relying
on svn.python.org, which recently changed root certificate.

..

.. bpo: 25616
.. date: 8900
.. nonce: Qr-60p
.. section: Tests

Tests for OrderedDict are extracted from test_collections into separate file
test_ordered_dict.

..

.. bpo: 25449
.. date: 8899
.. nonce: MP6KNs
.. section: Tests

Added tests for OrderedDict subclasses.

..

.. bpo: 25188
.. date: 8898
.. nonce: lnLnIW
.. section: Tests

Add -P/--pgo to test.regrtest to suppress error output when running the test
suite for the purposes of a PGO build. Initial patch by Alecsandru Patrascu.

..

.. bpo: 22806
.. date: 8897
.. nonce: _QHyyV
.. section: Tests

Add ``python -m test --list-tests`` command to list tests.

..

.. bpo: 18174
.. date: 8896
.. nonce: TzH9d_
.. section: Tests

``python -m test --huntrleaks ...`` now also checks for leak of file
descriptors. Patch written by Richard Oudkerk.

..

.. bpo: 25260
.. date: 8895
.. nonce: jw3p83
.. section: Tests

Fix ``python -m test --coverage`` on Windows. Remove the list of ignored
directories.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 8894
.. nonce: X-Bk5l
.. section: Tests

``PCbuild\rt.bat`` now accepts an unlimited number of arguments to pass
along to regrtest.py.  Previously there was a limit of 9.

..

.. bpo: 26583
.. date: 8893
.. nonce: Up7hTl
.. section: Tests

Skip test_timestamp_overflow in test_import if bytecode files cannot be
written.

..

.. bpo: 21277
.. date: 8892
.. nonce: 7y1j9a
.. section: Build

Don't try to link _ctypes with a ffi_convenience library.

..

.. bpo: 26884
.. date: 8891
.. nonce: O8-azL
.. section: Build

Fix linking extension modules for cross builds. Patch by Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 26932
.. date: 8890
.. nonce: 5kzaG9
.. section: Build

Fixed support of RTLD_* constants defined as enum values, not via macros (in
particular on Android).  Patch by Chi Hsuan Yen.

..

.. bpo: 22359
.. date: 8889
.. nonce: HDjM4s
.. section: Build

Disable the rules for running _freeze_importlib and pgen when
cross-compiling.  The output of these programs is normally saved with the source
code anyway, and is still regenerated when doing a native build. Patch by
Xavier de Gaye.

..

.. bpo: 21668
.. date: 8888
.. nonce: qWwBui
.. section: Build

Link audioop, _datetime, _ctypes_test modules to libm, except on Mac OS X.
Patch written by Chi Hsuan Yen.

..

.. bpo: 25702
.. date: 8887
.. nonce: ipxyJs
.. section: Build

A --with-lto configure option has been added that will enable link time
optimizations at build time during a make profile-opt. Some compilers and
toolchains are known to not produce stable code when using LTO, be sure to
test things thoroughly before relying on it. It can provide a few % speed up
over profile-opt alone.

..

.. bpo: 26624
.. date: 8886
.. nonce: 4fGrTl
.. section: Build

Adds validation of ucrtbase[d].dll version with warning for old versions.

..

.. bpo: 17603
.. date: 8885
.. nonce: 102DA-
.. section: Build

Avoid error about nonexistant fileblocks.o file by using a lower-level check
for st_blocks in struct stat.

..

.. bpo: 26079
.. date: 8884
.. nonce: mEzW0O
.. section: Build

Fixing the build output folder for tix-8.4.3.6. Patch by Bjoern Thiel.

..

.. bpo: 26465
.. date: 8883
.. nonce: _YR608
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use OpenSSL 1.0.2g.

..

.. bpo: 25348
.. date: 8882
.. nonce: FLSPfp
.. section: Build

Added ``--pgo`` and ``--pgo-job`` arguments to ``PCbuild\build.bat`` for
building with Profile-Guided Optimization.  The old
``PCbuild\build_pgo.bat`` script is removed.

..

.. bpo: 25827
.. date: 8881
.. nonce: yg3DMM
.. section: Build

Add support for building with ICC to ``configure``, including a new
``--with-icc`` flag.

..

.. bpo: 25696
.. date: 8880
.. nonce: 2R_wIv
.. section: Build

Fix installation of Python on UNIX with make -j9.

..

.. bpo: 24986
.. date: 8879
.. nonce: 1WyXeU
.. section: Build

It is now possible to build Python on Windows without errors when external
libraries are not available.

..

.. bpo: 24421
.. date: 8878
.. nonce: 2zY7vM
.. section: Build

Compile Modules/_math.c once, before building extensions. Previously it
could fail to compile properly if the math and cmath builds were concurrent.

..

.. bpo: 26465
.. date: 8877
.. nonce: PkIaV8
.. section: Build

Update OS X 10.5+ 32-bit-only installer to build and link with OpenSSL
1.0.2g.

..

.. bpo: 26268
.. date: 8876
.. nonce: I3-YLh
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds to use OpenSSL 1.0.2f.

..

.. bpo: 25136
.. date: 8875
.. nonce: Vi-fmO
.. section: Build

Support Apple Xcode 7's new textual SDK stub libraries.

..

.. bpo: 24324
.. date: 8874
.. nonce: m6DZMx
.. section: Build

Do not enable unreachable code warnings when using gcc as the option does
not work correctly in older versions of gcc and has been silently removed as
of gcc-4.5.

..

.. bpo: 27053
.. date: 8873
.. nonce: 1IRbae
.. section: Windows

Updates make_zip.py to correctly generate library ZIP file.

..

.. bpo: 26268
.. date: 8872
.. nonce: Z-lJEh
.. section: Windows

Update the prepare_ssl.py script to handle OpenSSL releases that don't
include the contents of the include directory (that is, 1.0.2e and later).

..

.. bpo: 26071
.. date: 8871
.. nonce: wLxL2l
.. section: Windows

bdist_wininst created binaries fail to start and find 32bit Python

..

.. bpo: 26073
.. date: 8870
.. nonce: XwWgHp
.. section: Windows

Update the list of magic numbers in launcher

..

.. bpo: 26065
.. date: 8869
.. nonce: SkVLJp
.. section: Windows

Excludes venv from library when generating embeddable distro.

..

.. bpo: 25022
.. date: 8868
.. nonce: vAt_zr
.. section: Windows

Removed very outdated PC/example_nt/ directory.

..

.. bpo: 26799
.. date: 8867
.. nonce: gK2VXX
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix python-gdb.py: don't get C types once when the Python code is loaded,
but get C types on demand. The C types can change if python-gdb.py is loaded
before the Python executable. Patch written by Thomas Ilsche.

..

.. bpo: 26271
.. date: 8866
.. nonce: wg-rzr
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix the Freeze tool to properly use flags passed through configure. Patch by
Daniel Shaulov.

..

.. bpo: 26489
.. date: 8865
.. nonce: rJ_U5S
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add dictionary unpacking support to Tools/parser/unparse.py. Patch by Guo Ci
Teo.

..

.. bpo: 26316
.. date: 8864
.. nonce: QJvVOi
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix variable name typo in Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 25440
.. date: 8863
.. nonce: 5xhyGr
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix output of python-config --extension-suffix.

..

.. bpo: 25154
.. date: 8862
.. nonce: yLO-r4
.. section: Tools/Demos

The pyvenv script has been deprecated in favour of `python3 -m venv`.

..

.. bpo: 26312
.. date: 8861
.. nonce: h1T61B
.. section: C API

SystemError is now raised in all programming bugs with using
PyArg_ParseTupleAndKeywords().  RuntimeError did raised before in some
programming bugs.

..

.. bpo: 26198
.. date: 8860
.. nonce: lVn1HX
.. section: C API

ValueError is now raised instead of TypeError on buffer overflow in parsing
"es#" and "et#" format units.  SystemError is now raised instead of
TypeError on programmatical error in parsing format string.
