.. bpo: 27704
.. date: 9155
.. nonce: RUxzHf
.. release date: 2016-08-15
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimized creating bytes and bytearray from byte-like objects and iterables.
Speed up to 3 times for short objects.  Original patch by Naoki Inada.

..

.. bpo: 26823
.. date: 9154
.. nonce: UWORiU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Large sections of repeated lines in tracebacks are now abbreviated as
"[Previous line repeated {count} more times]" by the builtin traceback
rendering. Patch by Emanuel Barry.

..

.. bpo: 27574
.. date: 9153
.. nonce: q73Tss
.. section: Core and Builtins

Decreased an overhead of parsing keyword arguments in functions implemented
with using Argument Clinic.

..

.. bpo: 22557
.. date: 9152
.. nonce: Hta2Rz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now importing already imported modules is up to 2.5 times faster.

..

.. bpo: 17596
.. date: 9151
.. nonce: XgbA9V
.. section: Core and Builtins

Include <wincrypt.h> to help with Min GW building.

..

.. bpo: 17599
.. date: 9150
.. nonce: noy7o1
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Windows, rename the privately defined REPARSE_DATA_BUFFER structure to
avoid conflicting with the definition from Min GW.

..

.. bpo: 27507
.. date: 9149
.. nonce: 3pX0Be
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add integer overflow check in bytearray.extend().  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27581
.. date: 9148
.. nonce: KezjNt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't rely on wrapping for overflow check in PySequence_Tuple().  Patch by
Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 1621
.. date: 9147
.. nonce: _FZWTr
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid signed integer overflow in list and tuple operations. Patch by Xiang
Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27419
.. date: 9146
.. nonce: YaGodL
.. section: Core and Builtins

Standard __import__() no longer look up "__import__" in globals or builtins
for importing submodules or "from import".  Fixed a crash if raise a warning
about unabling to resolve package from __spec__ or __package__.

..

.. bpo: 27083
.. date: 9145
.. nonce: F4ZT1C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Respect the PYTHONCASEOK environment variable under Windows.

..

.. bpo: 27514
.. date: 9144
.. nonce: NLbwPG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make having too many statically nested blocks a SyntaxError instead of
SystemError.

..

.. bpo: 27366
.. date: 9143
.. nonce: VrInsj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Implemented PEP 487 (Simpler customization of class creation). Upon
subclassing, the __init_subclass__ classmethod is called on the base class.
Descriptors are initialized with __set_name__ after class creation.

..

.. bpo: 26027
.. date: 9142
.. nonce: nfVMKM
.. section: Library

Add PEP 519/__fspath__() support to the os and os.path modules. Includes
code from Jelle Zijlstra. (See also: bpo-27524)

..

.. bpo: 27598
.. date: 9141
.. nonce: y7PtEV
.. section: Library

Add Collections to collections.abc. Patch by Ivan Levkivskyi, docs by Neil
Girdhar.

..

.. bpo: 25958
.. date: 9140
.. nonce: X-V4U1
.. section: Library

Support "anti-registration" of special methods from various ABCs, like
__hash__, __iter__ or __len__.  All these (and several more) can be set to
None in an implementation class and the behavior will be as if the method is
not defined at all. (Previously, this mechanism existed only for __hash__,
to make mutable classes unhashable.)  Code contributed by Andrew Barnert and
Ivan Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 16764
.. date: 9139
.. nonce: cPbNjL
.. section: Library

Support keyword arguments to zlib.decompress().  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27736
.. date: 9138
.. nonce: 8kMhpQ
.. section: Library

Prevent segfault after interpreter re-initialization due to ref count
problem introduced in code for Issue #27038 in 3.6.0a3. Patch by Xiang
Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 25628
.. date: 9137
.. nonce: UcQnHF
.. section: Library

The *verbose* and *rename* parameters for collections.namedtuple are now
keyword-only.

..

.. bpo: 12345
.. date: 9136
.. nonce: nbAEM8
.. section: Library

Add mathematical constant tau to math and cmath. See also PEP 628.

..

.. bpo: 26823
.. date: 9135
.. nonce: HcO8tR
.. section: Library

traceback.StackSummary.format now abbreviates large sections of repeated
lines as "[Previous line repeated {count} more times]" (this change then
further affects other traceback display operations in the module). Patch by
Emanuel Barry.

..

.. bpo: 27664
.. date: 9134
.. nonce: 6DJPxw
.. section: Library

Add to concurrent.futures.thread.ThreadPoolExecutor() the ability to specify
a thread name prefix.

..

.. bpo: 27181
.. date: 9133
.. nonce: 8aw9TZ
.. section: Library

Add geometric_mean and harmonic_mean to statistics module.

..

.. bpo: 27573
.. date: 9132
.. nonce: B7XhTs
.. section: Library

code.interact now prints an message when exiting.

..

.. bpo: 6422
.. date: 9131
.. nonce: iBSc45
.. section: Library

Add autorange method to timeit.Timer objects.

..

.. bpo: 27773
.. date: 9130
.. nonce: hMSSeX
.. section: Library

Correct some memory management errors server_hostname in _ssl.wrap_socket().

..

.. bpo: 26750
.. date: 9129
.. nonce: OQn3fr
.. section: Library

unittest.mock.create_autospec() now works properly for subclasses of
property() and other data descriptors.  Removes the never publicly used,
never documented unittest.mock.DescriptorTypes tuple.

..

.. bpo: 26754
.. date: 9128
.. nonce: XZqomf
.. section: Library

Undocumented support of general bytes-like objects as path in compile() and
similar functions is now deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 26800
.. date: 9127
.. nonce: QDcK8u
.. section: Library

Undocumented support of general bytes-like objects as paths in os functions
is now deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 26981
.. date: 9126
.. nonce: yhNTCf
.. section: Library

Add _order_ compatibility shim to enum.Enum for Python 2/3 code bases.

..

.. bpo: 27661
.. date: 9125
.. nonce: 3JZckO
.. section: Library

Added tzinfo keyword argument to datetime.combine.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9124
.. nonce: Ny9oPv
.. section: Library

In the curses module, raise an error if window.getstr() or window.instr() is
passed a negative value.

..

.. bpo: 27783
.. date: 9123
.. nonce: cR1jXH
.. section: Library

Fix possible usage of uninitialized memory in operator.methodcaller.

..

.. bpo: 27774
.. date: 9122
.. nonce: FDcik1
.. section: Library

Fix possible Py_DECREF on unowned object in _sre.

..

.. bpo: 27760
.. date: 9121
.. nonce: gxMjp4
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in binascii.b2a_qp.

..

.. bpo: 27758
.. date: 9120
.. nonce: 0NRV03
.. section: Library

Fix possible integer overflow in the _csv module for large record lengths.

..

.. bpo: 27568
.. date: 9119
.. nonce: OnuO9s
.. section: Library

Prevent HTTPoxy attack (CVE-2016-1000110). Ignore the HTTP_PROXY variable
when REQUEST_METHOD environment is set, which indicates that the script is
in CGI mode.

..

.. bpo: 7063
.. date: 9118
.. nonce: nXsVKB
.. section: Library

Remove dead code from the "array" module's slice handling. Patch by Chuck.

..

.. bpo: 27656
.. date: 9117
.. nonce: joTscM
.. section: Library

Do not assume sched.h defines any SCHED_* constants.

..

.. bpo: 27130
.. date: 9116
.. nonce: SUxwXZ
.. section: Library

In the "zlib" module, fix handling of large buffers (typically 4 GiB) when
compressing and decompressing.  Previously, inputs were limited to 4 GiB,
and compression and decompression operations did not properly handle results
of 4 GiB.

..

.. bpo: 24773
.. date: 9115
.. nonce: IDW05R
.. section: Library

Implemented PEP 495 (Local Time Disambiguation).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9114
.. nonce: lOkwM8
.. section: Library

Expose the EPOLLEXCLUSIVE constant (when it is defined) in the select
module.

..

.. bpo: 27567
.. date: 9113
.. nonce: bYOgyw
.. section: Library

Expose the EPOLLRDHUP and POLLRDHUP constants in the select module.

..

.. bpo: 1621
.. date: 9112
.. nonce: 0nclmI
.. section: Library

Avoid signed int negation overflow in the "audioop" module.

..

.. bpo: 27533
.. date: 9111
.. nonce: iDmKzV
.. section: Library

Release GIL in nt._isdir

..

.. bpo: 17711
.. date: 9110
.. nonce: 47AILJ
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickling by the persistent ID with protocol 0. Original patch by
Alexandre Vassalotti.

..

.. bpo: 27522
.. date: 9109
.. nonce: 8vVz_t
.. section: Library

Avoid an unintentional reference cycle in email.feedparser.

..

.. bpo: 27512
.. date: 9108
.. nonce: FaGwup
.. section: Library

Fix a segfault when os.fspath() called an __fspath__() method that raised an
exception. Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 27714
.. date: 9107
.. nonce: bUEDsI
.. section: IDLE

text_textview and test_autocomplete now pass when re-run in the same
process.  This occurs when test_idle fails when run with the -w option but
without -jn.  Fix warning from test_config.

..

.. bpo: 27621
.. date: 9106
.. nonce: BcpOPU
.. section: IDLE

Put query response validation error messages in the query box itself instead
of in a separate massagebox.  Redo tests to match. Add Mac OSX refinements.
Original patch by Mark Roseman.

..

.. bpo: 27620
.. date: 9105
.. nonce: TXRR6x
.. section: IDLE

Escape key now closes Query box as cancelled.

..

.. bpo: 27609
.. date: 9104
.. nonce: MbTuKa
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: tab after initial whitespace should tab, not autocomplete. This fixes
problem with writing docstrings at least twice indented.

..

.. bpo: 27609
.. date: 9103
.. nonce: OBYgv_
.. section: IDLE

Explicitly return None when there are also non-None returns. In a few cases,
reverse a condition and eliminate a return.

..

.. bpo: 25507
.. date: 9102
.. nonce: lxf68d
.. section: IDLE

IDLE no longer runs buggy code because of its tkinter imports. Users must
include the same imports required to run directly in Python.

..

.. bpo: 27173
.. date: 9101
.. nonce: M-fYaV
.. section: IDLE

Add 'IDLE Modern Unix' to the built-in key sets. Make the default key set
depend on the platform. Add tests for the changes to the config module.

..

.. bpo: 27452
.. date: 9100
.. nonce: RtWnyR
.. section: IDLE

add line counter and crc to IDLE configHandler test dump.

..

.. bpo: 25805
.. date: 9099
.. nonce: 9SVxXQ
.. section: Tests

Skip a test in test_pkgutil as needed that doesn't work when ``__name__ ==
__main__``. Patch by SilentGhost.

..

.. bpo: 27472
.. date: 9098
.. nonce: NS3L93
.. section: Tests

Add test.support.unix_shell as the path to the default shell.

..

.. bpo: 27369
.. date: 9097
.. nonce: LG7U2D
.. section: Tests

In test_pyexpat, avoid testing an error message detail that changed in Expat
2.2.0.

..

.. bpo: 27594
.. date: 9096
.. nonce: w3F57B
.. section: Tests

Prevent assertion error when running test_ast with coverage enabled: ensure
code object has a valid first line number. Patch suggested by Ivan
Levkivskyi.

..

.. bpo: 27647
.. date: 9095
.. nonce: -1HUR6
.. section: Windows

Update bundled Tcl/Tk to 8.6.6.

..

.. bpo: 27610
.. date: 9094
.. nonce: O0o0mB
.. section: Windows

Adds PEP 514 metadata to Windows installer

..

.. bpo: 27469
.. date: 9093
.. nonce: 0GwDkX
.. section: Windows

Adds a shell extension to the launcher so that drag and drop works
correctly.

..

.. bpo: 27309
.. date: 9092
.. nonce: chiOo6
.. section: Windows

Enables proper Windows styles in python[w].exe manifest.

..

.. bpo: 27713
.. date: 9091
.. nonce: _3DgXG
.. section: Build

Suppress spurious build warnings when updating importlib's bootstrap files.
Patch by Xiang Zhang

..

.. bpo: 25825
.. date: 9090
.. nonce: MLbdVU
.. section: Build

Correct the references to Modules/python.exp, which is required on AIX.  The
references were accidentally changed in 3.5.0a1.

..

.. bpo: 27453
.. date: 9089
.. nonce: Pb5DBi
.. section: Build

CPP invocation in configure must use CPPFLAGS. Patch by Chi Hsuan Yen.

..

.. bpo: 27641
.. date: 9088
.. nonce: eGzgCk
.. section: Build

The configure script now inserts comments into the makefile to prevent the
pgen and _freeze_importlib executables from being cross-compiled.

..

.. bpo: 26662
.. date: 9087
.. nonce: XkwRxM
.. section: Build

Set PYTHON_FOR_GEN in configure as the Python program to be used for file
generation during the build.

..

.. bpo: 10910
.. date: 9086
.. nonce: ZdRayb
.. section: Build

Avoid C++ compilation errors on FreeBSD and OS X. Also update FreedBSD
version checks for the original ctype UTF-8 workaround.
