.. bpo: 28183
.. date: 9707
.. nonce: MJZeNd
.. release date: 2016-10-10
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimize and cleanup dict iteration.

..

.. bpo: 26081
.. date: 9706
.. nonce: _x5vjl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added C implementation of asyncio.Future. Original patch by Yury Selivanov.

..

.. bpo: 28379
.. date: 9705
.. nonce: DuXlco
.. section: Core and Builtins

Added sanity checks and tests for PyUnicode_CopyCharacters(). Patch by Xiang
Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 28376
.. date: 9704
.. nonce: oPD-5D
.. section: Core and Builtins

The type of long range iterator is now registered as Iterator. Patch by Oren
Milman.

..

.. bpo: 28376
.. date: 9703
.. nonce: YEy-uG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Creating instances of range_iterator by calling range_iterator type now is
deprecated.  Patch by Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 28376
.. date: 9702
.. nonce: fLeHM2
.. section: Core and Builtins

The constructor of range_iterator now checks that step is not 0. Patch by
Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 26906
.. date: 9701
.. nonce: YBjcwI
.. section: Core and Builtins

Resolving special methods of uninitialized type now causes implicit
initialization of the type instead of a fail.

..

.. bpo: 18287
.. date: 9700
.. nonce: k6jffS
.. section: Core and Builtins

PyType_Ready() now checks that tp_name is not NULL. Original patch by Niklas
Koep.

..

.. bpo: 24098
.. date: 9699
.. nonce: XqlP_1
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed possible crash when AST is changed in process of compiling it.

..

.. bpo: 28201
.. date: 9698
.. nonce: GWUxAy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Dict reduces possibility of 2nd conflict in hash table when hashes have same
lower bits.

..

.. bpo: 28350
.. date: 9697
.. nonce: 8M5Eg9
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants with null character no longer interned.

..

.. bpo: 26617
.. date: 9696
.. nonce: Gh5LvN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash when GC runs during weakref callbacks.

..

.. bpo: 27942
.. date: 9695
.. nonce: ZGuhns
.. section: Core and Builtins

String constants now interned recursively in tuples and frozensets.

..

.. bpo: 21578
.. date: 9694
.. nonce: GI1bhj
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed misleading error message when ImportError called with invalid keyword
args.

..

.. bpo: 28203
.. date: 9693
.. nonce: LRn5vp
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect type in complex(1.0, {2:3}) error message. Patch by Soumya
Sharma.

..

.. bpo: 28086
.. date: 9692
.. nonce: JsQPMQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Single var-positional argument of tuple subtype was passed unscathed to the
C-defined function.  Now it is converted to exact tuple.

..

.. bpo: 28214
.. date: 9691
.. nonce: zQF8Em
.. section: Core and Builtins

Now __set_name__ is looked up on the class instead of the instance.

..

.. bpo: 27955
.. date: 9690
.. nonce: HC4pZ4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fallback on reading /dev/urandom device when the getrandom() syscall fails
with EPERM, for example when blocked by SECCOMP.

..

.. bpo: 28192
.. date: 9689
.. nonce: eR6stU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't import readline in isolated mode.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9688
.. nonce: 9EbOiD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Upgrade internal unicode databases to Unicode version 9.0.0.

..

.. bpo: 28131
.. date: 9687
.. nonce: owq0wW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a regression in zipimport's compile_source().  zipimport should use the
same optimization level as the interpreter.

..

.. bpo: 28126
.. date: 9686
.. nonce: Qf6-uQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace Py_MEMCPY with memcpy(). Visual Studio can properly optimize
memcpy().

..

.. bpo: 28120
.. date: 9685
.. nonce: e5xc1i
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix dict.pop() for splitted dictionary when trying to remove a "pending key"
(Not yet inserted in split-table). Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 26182
.. date: 9684
.. nonce: jYlqTO
.. section: Core and Builtins

Raise DeprecationWarning when async and await keywords are used as
variable/attribute/class/function name.

..

.. bpo: 27998
.. date: 9683
.. nonce: CPhy4H
.. section: Library

Fixed bytes path support in os.scandir() on Windows. Patch by Eryk Sun.

..

.. bpo: 28317
.. date: 9682
.. nonce: LgHleA
.. section: Library

The disassembler now decodes FORMAT_VALUE argument.

..

.. bpo: 26293
.. date: 9681
.. nonce: 2mjvwX
.. section: Library

Fixed writing ZIP files that starts not from the start of the file.  Offsets
in ZIP file now are relative to the start of the archive in conforming to
the specification.

..

.. bpo: 28380
.. date: 9680
.. nonce: jKPMzH
.. section: Library

unittest.mock Mock autospec functions now properly support assert_called,
assert_not_called, and assert_called_once.

..

.. bpo: 27181
.. date: 9679
.. nonce: SQyDpC
.. section: Library

remove statistics.geometric_mean and defer until 3.7.

..

.. bpo: 28229
.. date: 9678
.. nonce: BKAxcS
.. section: Library

lzma module now supports pathlib.

..

.. bpo: 28321
.. date: 9677
.. nonce: bQ-IIX
.. section: Library

Fixed writing non-BMP characters with binary format in plistlib.

..

.. bpo: 28225
.. date: 9676
.. nonce: 6N28nu
.. section: Library

bz2 module now supports pathlib.  Initial patch by Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 28227
.. date: 9675
.. nonce: 7lUz8i
.. section: Library

gzip now supports pathlib.  Patch by Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 27358
.. date: 9674
.. nonce: t288Iv
.. section: Library

Optimized merging var-keyword arguments and improved error message when
passing a non-mapping as a var-keyword argument.

..

.. bpo: 28257
.. date: 9673
.. nonce: SVD_IH
.. section: Library

Improved error message when passing a non-iterable as a var-positional
argument.  Added opcode BUILD_TUPLE_UNPACK_WITH_CALL.

..

.. bpo: 28322
.. date: 9672
.. nonce: l9hzap
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crashes when unpickle itertools objects from incorrect pickle
data.  Based on patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 28228
.. date: 9671
.. nonce: 1qBwdM
.. section: Library

imghdr now supports pathlib.

..

.. bpo: 28226
.. date: 9670
.. nonce: nMXiwU
.. section: Library

compileall now supports pathlib.

..

.. bpo: 28314
.. date: 9669
.. nonce: N7YrkN
.. section: Library

Fix function declaration (C flags) for the getiterator() method of
xml.etree.ElementTree.Element.

..

.. bpo: 28148
.. date: 9668
.. nonce: Flzndx
.. section: Library

Stop using localtime() and gmtime() in the time module.
Introduced platform independent _PyTime_localtime API that is similar to
POSIX localtime_r, but available on all platforms.  Patch by Ed Schouten.

..

.. bpo: 28253
.. date: 9667
.. nonce: aLfmhe
.. section: Library

Fixed calendar functions for extreme months: 0001-01 and 9999-12.
Methods itermonthdays() and itermonthdays2() are reimplemented so that they
don't call itermonthdates() which can cause datetime.date under/overflow.

..

.. bpo: 28275
.. date: 9666
.. nonce: EhWIsz
.. section: Library

Fixed possible use after free in the decompress() methods of the
LZMADecompressor and BZ2Decompressor classes. Original patch by John Leitch.

..

.. bpo: 27897
.. date: 9665
.. nonce: I0Ppmx
.. section: Library

Fixed possible crash in sqlite3.Connection.create_collation() if pass
invalid string-like object as a name.  Patch by Xiang Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 18844
.. date: 9664
.. nonce: fQsEdn
.. section: Library

random.choices() now has k as a keyword-only argument to improve the
readability of common cases and come into line with the signature used in
other languages.

..

.. bpo: 18893
.. date: 9663
.. nonce: osiX5c
.. section: Library

Fix invalid exception handling in Lib/ctypes/macholib/dyld.py. Patch by
Madison May.

..

.. bpo: 27611
.. date: 9662
.. nonce: A_ArH_
.. section: Library

Fixed support of default root window in the tkinter.tix module. Added the
master parameter in the DisplayStyle constructor.

..

.. bpo: 27348
.. date: 9661
.. nonce: tDx7Vw
.. section: Library

In the traceback module, restore the formatting of exception messages like
"Exception: None".  This fixes a regression introduced in 3.5a2.

..

.. bpo: 25651
.. date: 9660
.. nonce: 3UhyPo
.. section: Library

Allow false values to be used for msg parameter of subTest().

..

.. bpo: 27778
.. date: 9659
.. nonce: Yyo1aP
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in os.getrandom() when the getrandom() is interrupted by a
signal and a signal handler raises a Python exception.

..

.. bpo: 28200
.. date: 9658
.. nonce: 4IEbr7
.. section: Library

Fix memory leak on Windows in the os module (fix path_converter() function).

..

.. bpo: 25400
.. date: 9657
.. nonce: d9Qn0E
.. section: Library

RobotFileParser now correctly returns default values for crawl_delay and
request_rate.  Initial patch by Peter Wirtz.

..

.. bpo: 27932
.. date: 9656
.. nonce: mtgl-6
.. section: Library

Prevent memory leak in win32_ver().

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 9655
.. nonce: iPpjqX
.. section: Library

Fix UnboundLocalError in socket._sendfile_use_sendfile.

..

.. bpo: 28075
.. date: 9654
.. nonce: aLiUs9
.. section: Library

Check for ERROR_ACCESS_DENIED in Windows implementation of os.stat().  Patch
by Eryk Sun.

..

.. bpo: 22493
.. date: 9653
.. nonce: Mv_hZf
.. section: Library

Warning message emitted by using inline flags in the middle of regular
expression now contains a (truncated) regex pattern. Patch by Tim Graham.

..

.. bpo: 25270
.. date: 9652
.. nonce: jrZruM
.. section: Library

Prevent codecs.escape_encode() from raising SystemError when an empty
bytestring is passed.

..

.. bpo: 28181
.. date: 9651
.. nonce: NGc4Yv
.. section: Library

Get antigravity over HTTPS. Patch by Kaartic Sivaraam.

..

.. bpo: 25895
.. date: 9650
.. nonce: j92qoQ
.. section: Library

Enable WebSocket URL schemes in urllib.parse.urljoin. Patch by Gergely Imreh
and Markus Holtermann.

..

.. bpo: 28114
.. date: 9649
.. nonce: gmFXsA
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in parse_envlist() when env contains byte strings. Patch by Eryk
Sun.

..

.. bpo: 27599
.. date: 9648
.. nonce: itvm8T
.. section: Library

Fixed buffer overrun in binascii.b2a_qp() and binascii.a2b_qp().

..

.. bpo: 27906
.. date: 9647
.. nonce: TBBXrv
.. section: Library

Fix socket accept exhaustion during high TCP traffic. Patch by Kevin Conway.

..

.. bpo: 28174
.. date: 9646
.. nonce: CV1UdI
.. section: Library

Handle when SO_REUSEPORT isn't properly supported. Patch by Seth Michael
Larson.

..

.. bpo: 26654
.. date: 9645
.. nonce: XtzTE9
.. section: Library

Inspect functools.partial in asyncio.Handle.__repr__. Patch by iceboy.

..

.. bpo: 26909
.. date: 9644
.. nonce: ASiakT
.. section: Library

Fix slow pipes IO in asyncio. Patch by INADA Naoki.

..

.. bpo: 28176
.. date: 9643
.. nonce: sU8R6L
.. section: Library

Fix callbacks race in asyncio.SelectorLoop.sock_connect.

..

.. bpo: 27759
.. date: 9642
.. nonce: qpMDGq
.. section: Library

Fix selectors incorrectly retain invalid file descriptors. Patch by Mark
Williams.

..

.. bpo: 28368
.. date: 9641
.. nonce: fGl9y4
.. section: Library

Refuse monitoring processes if the child watcher has no loop attached. Patch
by Vincent Michel.

..

.. bpo: 28369
.. date: 9640
.. nonce: 8DTANe
.. section: Library

Raise RuntimeError when transport's FD is used with add_reader, add_writer,
etc.

..

.. bpo: 28370
.. date: 9639
.. nonce: 18jBuZ
.. section: Library

Speedup asyncio.StreamReader.readexactly. Patch by Коренберг Марк.

..

.. bpo: 28371
.. date: 9638
.. nonce: U9Zqdk
.. section: Library

Deprecate passing asyncio.Handles to run_in_executor.

..

.. bpo: 28372
.. date: 9637
.. nonce: njcIPk
.. section: Library

Fix asyncio to support formatting of non-python coroutines.

..

.. bpo: 28399
.. date: 9636
.. nonce: QKIqRX
.. section: Library

Remove UNIX socket from FS before binding. Patch by Коренберг Марк.

..

.. bpo: 27972
.. date: 9635
.. nonce: ZK-GFm
.. section: Library

Prohibit Tasks to await on themselves.

..

.. bpo: 28402
.. date: 9634
.. nonce: v9zETJ
.. section: Windows

Adds signed catalog files for stdlib on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 28333
.. date: 9633
.. nonce: KnpeO4
.. section: Windows

Enables Unicode for ps1/ps2 and input() prompts. (Patch by Eryk Sun)

..

.. bpo: 28251
.. date: 9632
.. nonce: tR_AFs
.. section: Windows

Improvements to help manuals on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 28110
.. date: 9631
.. nonce: cnkP5F
.. section: Windows

launcher.msi has different product codes between 32-bit and 64-bit

..

.. bpo: 28161
.. date: 9630
.. nonce: hF91LI
.. section: Windows

Opening CON for write access fails

..

.. bpo: 28162
.. date: 9629
.. nonce: 3FHPVD
.. section: Windows

WindowsConsoleIO readall() fails if first line starts with Ctrl+Z

..

.. bpo: 28163
.. date: 9628
.. nonce: -DUgJw
.. section: Windows

WindowsConsoleIO fileno() passes wrong flags to _open_osfhandle

..

.. bpo: 28164
.. date: 9627
.. nonce: 5MfN0J
.. section: Windows

_PyIO_get_console_type fails for various paths

..

.. bpo: 28137
.. date: 9626
.. nonce: C1uvzY
.. section: Windows

Renames Windows path file to ._pth

..

.. bpo: 28138
.. date: 9625
.. nonce: pNdv64
.. section: Windows

Windows ._pth file should allow import site

..

.. bpo: 28426
.. date: 9624
.. nonce: zPwvbI
.. section: C API

Deprecated undocumented functions PyUnicode_AsEncodedObject(),
PyUnicode_AsDecodedObject(), PyUnicode_AsDecodedUnicode() and
PyUnicode_AsEncodedUnicode().

..

.. bpo: 28258
.. date: 9623
.. nonce: iKtAHd
.. section: Build

Fixed build with Estonian locale (python-config and distclean targets in
Makefile).  Patch by Arfrever Frehtes Taifersar Arahesis.

..

.. bpo: 26661
.. date: 9622
.. nonce: Z_HNbs
.. section: Build

setup.py now detects system libffi with multiarch wrapper.

..

.. bpo: 15819
.. date: 9621
.. nonce: QVDr3E
.. section: Build

Remove redundant include search directory option for building outside the
source tree.

..

.. bpo: 28217
.. date: 9620
.. nonce: Y37OKV
.. section: Tests

Adds _testconsole module to test console input.
