.. bpo: 33622
.. date: 2018-05-23-20-46-14
.. nonce: xPucO9
.. release date: 2018-05-30
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a leak when the garbage collector fails to add an object with the
``__del__`` method or referenced by it into the :data:`gc.garbage` list.
:c:func:`PyGC_Collect` can now be called when an exception is set and
preserves it.

..

.. bpo: 33509
.. date: 2018-05-14-17-31-02
.. nonce: pIUfTd
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix module_globals parameter of warnings.warn_explicit(): don't crash if
module_globals is not a dict.

..

.. bpo: 20104
.. date: 2018-05-14-11-34-55
.. nonce: kqBNzv
.. section: Core and Builtins

The new `os.posix_spawn` added in 3.7.0b1 was removed as we are still
working on what the API should look like.  Expect this in 3.8 instead.

..

.. bpo: 33475
.. date: 2018-05-13-01-26-18
.. nonce: rI0y1U
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed miscellaneous bugs in converting annotations to strings and optimized
parentheses in the string representation.

..

.. bpo: 33391
.. date: 2018-05-02-08-36-03
.. nonce: z4a7rb
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a leak in set_symmetric_difference().

..

.. bpo: 28055
.. date: 2018-04-25-20-44-42
.. nonce: f49kfC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix unaligned accesses in siphash24(). Patch by Rolf Eike Beer.

..

.. bpo: 32911
.. date: 2018-02-27-20-57-00
.. nonce: cmKfco
.. section: Core and Builtins

Due to unexpected compatibility issues discovered during downstream beta
testing, reverted :issue:`29463`. ``docstring`` field is removed from
Module, ClassDef, FunctionDef, and AsyncFunctionDef ast nodes which was
added in 3.7a1.  Docstring expression is restored as a first statement in
their body. Based on patch by Inada Naoki.

..

.. bpo: 21983
.. date: 2017-10-02-21-02-14
.. nonce: UoC319
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in `ctypes.cast()` in case the type argument is a ctypes
structured data type. Patch by Eryk Sun and Oren Milman.

..

.. bpo: 32751
.. date: 2018-05-29-15-32-18
.. nonce: oBTqr7
.. section: Library

When cancelling the task due to a timeout, :meth:`asyncio.wait_for` will now
wait until the cancellation is complete.

..

.. bpo: 32684
.. date: 2018-05-29-12-51-18
.. nonce: ZEIism
.. section: Library

Fix gather to propagate cancellation of itself even with return_exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 33654
.. date: 2018-05-29-01-13-39
.. nonce: sa81Si
.. section: Library

Support protocol type switching in SSLTransport.set_protocol().

..

.. bpo: 33674
.. date: 2018-05-29-00-37-56
.. nonce: 2IkGhL
.. section: Library

Pause the transport as early as possible to further reduce the risk of
data_received() being called before connection_made().

..

.. bpo: 33674
.. date: 2018-05-28-22-49-59
.. nonce: 6LFFj7
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in SSLProtocol.connection_made() of asyncio.sslproto:
start immediately the handshake instead of using call_soon(). Previously,
data_received() could be called before the handshake started, causing the
handshake to hang or fail.

..

.. bpo: 31467
.. date: 2018-05-28-18-40-26
.. nonce: s4Fad3
.. section: Library

Fixed bug where calling write_eof() on a _SelectorSocketTransport after it's
already closed raises AttributeError.

..

.. bpo: 32610
.. date: 2018-05-28-16-40-32
.. nonce: KvUAsL
.. section: Library

Make asyncio.all_tasks() return only pending tasks.

..

.. bpo: 32410
.. date: 2018-05-28-16-19-35
.. nonce: Z1DZaF
.. section: Library

Avoid blocking on file IO in sendfile fallback code

..

.. bpo: 33469
.. date: 2018-05-28-15-55-12
.. nonce: hmXBpY
.. section: Library

Fix RuntimeError after closing loop that used run_in_executor

..

.. bpo: 33672
.. date: 2018-05-28-12-29-54
.. nonce: GM_Xm_
.. section: Library

Fix Task.__repr__ crash with Cython's bogus coroutines

..

.. bpo: 33654
.. date: 2018-05-26-13-09-34
.. nonce: IbYWxA
.. section: Library

Fix transport.set_protocol() to support switching between asyncio.Protocol
and asyncio.BufferedProtocol.  Fix loop.start_tls() to work with
asyncio.BufferedProtocols.

..

.. bpo: 33652
.. date: 2018-05-26-10-13-59
.. nonce: humFJ1
.. section: Library

Pickles of type variables and subscripted generics are now future-proof and
compatible with older Python versions.

..

.. bpo: 32493
.. date: 2018-05-24-17-41-36
.. nonce: 5tAoAu
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`uuid.uuid1` on FreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 33618
.. date: 2018-05-23-20-14-34
.. nonce: xU39lr
.. section: Library

Finalize and document preliminary and experimental TLS 1.3 support with
OpenSSL 1.1.1

..

.. bpo: 33623
.. date: 2018-05-23-14-58-05
.. nonce: wAw1cF
.. section: Library

Fix possible SIGSGV when asyncio.Future is created in __del__

..

.. bpo: 30877
.. date: 2018-05-22-13-05-12
.. nonce: JZEGjI
.. section: Library

Fixed a bug in the Python implementation of the JSON decoder that prevented
the cache of parsed strings from clearing after finishing the decoding.
Based on patch by c-fos.

..

.. bpo: 33570
.. date: 2018-05-18-21-50-47
.. nonce: 7CZy4t
.. section: Library

Change TLS 1.3 cipher suite settings for compatibility with OpenSSL
1.1.1-pre6 and newer. OpenSSL 1.1.1 will have TLS 1.3 cipers enabled by
default.

..

.. bpo: 28556
.. date: 2018-05-17-22-53-08
.. nonce: C6Hnd1
.. section: Library

Do not simplify arguments to `typing.Union`. Now `Union[Manager, Employee]`
is not simplified to `Employee` at runtime. Such simplification previously
caused several bugs and limited possibilities for introspection.

..

.. bpo: 33540
.. date: 2018-05-16-18-10-38
.. nonce: wy9LRV
.. section: Library

Add a new ``block_on_close`` class attribute to ``ForkingMixIn`` and
``ThreadingMixIn`` classes of :mod:`socketserver`.

..

.. bpo: 33548
.. date: 2018-05-16-17-05-48
.. nonce: xWslmx
.. section: Library

tempfile._candidate_tempdir_list should consider common TEMP locations

..

.. bpo: 33109
.. date: 2018-05-16-14-57-58
.. nonce: nPLL_S
.. section: Library

argparse subparsers are once again not required by default, reverting the
change in behavior introduced by bpo-26510 in 3.7.0a2.

..

.. bpo: 33536
.. date: 2018-05-16-10-07-40
.. nonce: _s0TE8
.. section: Library

dataclasses.make_dataclass now checks for invalid field names and duplicate
fields. Also, added a check for invalid field specifications.

..

.. bpo: 33542
.. date: 2018-05-16-09-30-27
.. nonce: idNAcs
.. section: Library

Prevent ``uuid.get_node`` from using a DUID instead of a MAC on Windows.
Patch by Zvi Effron

..

.. bpo: 26819
.. date: 2018-05-16-05-24-43
.. nonce: taxbVT
.. section: Library

Fix race condition with `ReadTransport.resume_reading` in Windows proactor
event loop.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2018-05-15-18-02-03
.. nonce: pj2Mbb
.. section: Library

Fix failure in `typing.get_type_hints()` when ClassVar was provided as a
string forward reference.

..

.. bpo: 33505
.. date: 2018-05-14-18-05-35
.. nonce: L8pAyt
.. section: Library

Optimize asyncio.ensure_future() by reordering if checks: 1.17x faster.

..

.. bpo: 33497
.. date: 2018-05-14-17-49-34
.. nonce: wWT6XM
.. section: Library

Add errors param to cgi.parse_multipart and make an encoding in FieldStorage
use the given errors (needed for Twisted).  Patch by Amber Brown.

..

.. bpo: 33495
.. date: 2018-05-14-10-29-03
.. nonce: TeGTQJ
.. section: Library

Change dataclasses.Fields repr to use the repr of each of its members,
instead of str.  This makes it more clear what each field actually
represents.  This is especially true for the 'type' member.

..

.. bpo: 33453
.. date: 2018-05-12-06-01-02
.. nonce: Fj-jMD
.. section: Library

Fix dataclasses to work if using literal string type annotations or if using
PEP 563 "Postponed Evaluation of Annotations".  Only specific string
prefixes are detected for both ClassVar ("ClassVar" and "typing.ClassVar")
and InitVar ("InitVar" and "dataclasses.InitVar").

..

.. bpo: 28556
.. date: 2018-05-08-16-43-42
.. nonce: _xr5mp
.. section: Library

Minor fixes in typing module: add annotations to ``NamedTuple.__new__``,
pass ``*args`` and ``**kwds`` in ``Generic.__new__``.  Original PRs by
Paulius Šarka and Chad Dombrova.

..

.. bpo: 20087
.. date: 2018-05-05-18-02-24
.. nonce: lJrvXL
.. section: Library

Updated alias mapping with glibc 2.27 supported locales.

..

.. bpo: 33422
.. date: 2018-05-05-09-53-05
.. nonce: 4FtQ0q
.. section: Library

Fix trailing quotation marks getting deleted when looking up byte/string
literals on pydoc. Patch by Andrés Delfino.

..

.. bpo: 28167
.. date: 2018-05-02-07-26-29
.. nonce: 7FwDfN
.. section: Library

The function ``platform.linux_ditribution`` and ``platform.dist`` now
trigger a ``DeprecationWarning`` and have been marked for removal in Python
3.8

..

.. bpo: 33197
.. date: 2018-04-29-23-56-20
.. nonce: dgRLqr
.. section: Library

Update error message when constructing invalid inspect.Parameters Patch by
Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 33263
.. date: 2018-04-11-20-29-19
.. nonce: B56Hc1
.. section: Library

Fix FD leak in `_SelectorSocketTransport`  Patch by Vlad Starostin.

..

.. bpo: 32861
.. date: 2018-04-02-20-44-54
.. nonce: HeBjzN
.. section: Library

The urllib.robotparser's ``__str__`` representation now includes wildcard
entries and the "Crawl-delay" and "Request-rate" fields. Patch by Michael
Lazar.

..

.. bpo: 32257
.. date: 2018-02-26-09-08-07
.. nonce: 6ElnUt
.. section: Library

The ssl module now contains OP_NO_RENEGOTIATION constant, available with
OpenSSL 1.1.0h or 1.1.1.

..

.. bpo: 16865
.. date: 2017-09-29-16-40-38
.. nonce: l-f6I_
.. section: Library

Support arrays >=2GiB in :mod:`ctypes`.  Patch by Segev Finer.

..

.. bpo: 23859
.. date: 2018-05-29-16-02-31
.. nonce: E5gba1
.. section: Documentation

Document that `asyncio.wait()` does not cancel its futures on timeout.

..

.. bpo: 32436
.. date: 2018-05-23-11-59-51
.. nonce: S1LGPa
.. section: Documentation

Document PEP 567 changes to asyncio.

..

.. bpo: 33604
.. date: 2018-05-22-11-47-14
.. nonce: 5YHTpz
.. section: Documentation

Update HMAC md5 default to a DeprecationWarning, bump removal to 3.8.

..

.. bpo: 33503
.. date: 2018-05-14-20-08-58
.. nonce: Wvt0qg
.. section: Documentation

Fix broken pypi link

..

.. bpo: 33421
.. date: 2018-05-14-15-15-41
.. nonce: 3GU_QO
.. section: Documentation

Add missing documentation for ``typing.AsyncContextManager``.

..

.. bpo: 33655
.. date: 2018-05-26-16-01-40
.. nonce: Frb4LA
.. section: Tests

Ignore test_posix_fallocate failures on BSD platforms that might be due to
running on ZFS.

..

.. bpo: 32604
.. date: 2018-05-14-13-32-46
.. nonce: a_z6D_
.. section: Tests

Remove the _xxsubinterpreters module (meant for testing) and associated
helpers.  This module was originally added recently in 3.7b1.

..

.. bpo: 33614
.. date: 2018-05-28-11-40-22
.. nonce: 28e0sE
.. section: Build

Ensures module definition files for the stable ABI on Windows are correctly
regenerated.

..

.. bpo: 33522
.. date: 2018-05-15-12-44-50
.. nonce: mJoNcA
.. section: Build

Enable CI builds on Visual Studio Team Services at
https://python.visualstudio.com/cpython

..

.. bpo: 33012
.. date: 2018-05-10-21-10-01
.. nonce: 5Zfjac
.. section: Build

Add ``-Wno-cast-function-type`` for gcc 8 for silencing warnings about
function casts like casting to PyCFunction in method definition lists.

..

.. bpo: 13631
.. date: 2018-05-16-13-25-58
.. nonce: UIjDyY
.. section: macOS

The .editrc file in user's home directory is now processed correctly during
the readline initialization through editline emulation on macOS.

..

.. bpo: 33628
.. date: 2018-05-23-19-51-07
.. nonce: sLlFLO
.. section: IDLE

IDLE: Cleanup codecontext.py and its test.

..

.. bpo: 33564
.. date: 2018-05-17-19-41-12
.. nonce: XzHZJe
.. section: IDLE

IDLE's code context now recognizes async as a block opener.

..

.. bpo: 32831
.. date: 2018-02-12-08-08-45
.. nonce: srDRvU
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings and tests for codecontext.
