.. bpo: 33136
.. date: 2018-03-25-12-05-43
.. nonce: TzSN4x
.. release date: 2018-03-29
.. section: Security

Harden ssl module against LibreSSL CVE-2018-8970.
X509_VERIFY_PARAM_set1_host() is called with an explicit namelen. A new test
ensures that NULL bytes are not allowed.

..

.. bpo: 33001
.. date: 2018-03-05-10-09-51
.. nonce: elj4Aa
.. section: Security

Minimal fix to prevent buffer overrun in os.symlink on Windows

..

.. bpo: 32981
.. date: 2018-03-02-10-24-52
.. nonce: O_qDyj
.. section: Security

Regexes in difflib and poplib were vulnerable to catastrophic backtracking.
These regexes formed potential DOS vectors (REDOS). They have been
refactored. This resolves CVE-2018-1060 and CVE-2018-1061. Patch by Jamie
Davis.

..

.. bpo: 33053
.. date: 2018-03-25-19-49-06
.. nonce: V3xlsH
.. section: Core and Builtins

When using the -m switch, sys.path[0] is now explicitly expanded as the
*starting* working directory, rather than being left as the empty path
(which allows imports from the current working directory at the time of the
import)

..

.. bpo: 33018
.. date: 2018-03-22-23-09-06
.. nonce: 0ncEJV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve consistency of errors raised by ``issubclass()`` when called with a
non-class and an abstract base class as the first and second arguments,
respectively. Patch by Josh Bronson.

..

.. bpo: 33041
.. date: 2018-03-18-13-56-14
.. nonce: XwPhI2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed jumping when the function contains an ``async for`` loop.

..

.. bpo: 33026
.. date: 2018-03-08-09-48-38
.. nonce: QZA3Ba
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed jumping out of "with" block by setting f_lineno.

..

.. bpo: 33005
.. date: 2018-03-06-12-19-19
.. nonce: LP-V2U
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash on fork when using a custom memory allocator (ex: using
PYTHONMALLOC env var). _PyGILState_Reinit() and _PyInterpreterState_Enable()
now use the default RAW memory allocator to allocate a new interpreters
mutex on fork.

..

.. bpo: 17288
.. date: 2018-02-27-13-36-21
.. nonce: Gdj24S
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent jumps from 'return' and 'exception' trace events.

..

.. bpo: 32836
.. date: 2018-02-14-12-35-47
.. nonce: bThJnx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Don't use temporary variables in cases of list/dict/set comprehensions

..

.. bpo: 33141
.. date: 2018-03-26-12-33-13
.. nonce: 23wlxf
.. section: Library

Have Field objects pass through __set_name__ to their default values, if
they have their own __set_name__.

..

.. bpo: 33096
.. date: 2018-03-25-13-18-16
.. nonce: ofdbe7
.. section: Library

Allow ttk.Treeview.insert to insert iid that has a false boolean value. Note
iid=0 and iid=False would be same. Patch by Garvit Khatri.

..

.. bpo: 32873
.. date: 2018-03-24-19-54-48
.. nonce: cHyoAm
.. section: Library

Treat type variables and special typing forms as immutable by copy and
pickle.  This fixes several minor issues and inconsistencies, and improves
backwards compatibility with Python 3.6.

..

.. bpo: 33134
.. date: 2018-03-24-19-34-26
.. nonce: hbVeIX
.. section: Library

When computing dataclass's __hash__, use the lookup table to contain the
function which returns the __hash__ value.  This is an improvement over
looking up a string, and then testing that string to see what to do.

..

.. bpo: 33127
.. date: 2018-03-24-15-08-24
.. nonce: olJmHv
.. section: Library

The ssl module now compiles with LibreSSL 2.7.1.

..

.. bpo: 32505
.. date: 2018-03-22-16-05-56
.. nonce: YK1N8v
.. section: Library

Raise TypeError if a member variable of a dataclass is of type Field, but
doesn't have a type annotation.

..

.. bpo: 33078
.. date: 2018-03-21-17-59-39
.. nonce: PQOniT
.. section: Library

Fix the failure on OSX caused by the tests relying on sem_getvalue

..

.. bpo: 33116
.. date: 2018-03-21-16-52-26
.. nonce: Tvzerj
.. section: Library

Add 'Field' to dataclasses.__all__.

..

.. bpo: 32896
.. date: 2018-03-20-20-53-21
.. nonce: ewW3Ln
.. section: Library

Fix an error where subclassing a dataclass with a field that uses a
default_factory would generate an incorrect class.

..

.. bpo: 33100
.. date: 2018-03-19-20-47-00
.. nonce: chyIO4
.. section: Library

Dataclasses: If a field has a default value that's a MemberDescriptorType,
then it's from that field being in __slots__, not an actual default value.

..

.. bpo: 32953
.. date: 2018-03-18-17-38-48
.. nonce: t8WAWN
.. section: Library

If a non-dataclass inherits from a frozen dataclass, allow attributes to be
added to the derived class.  Only attributes from the frozen dataclass
cannot be assigned to.  Require all dataclasses in a hierarchy to be either
all frozen or all non-frozen.

..

.. bpo: 33061
.. date: 2018-03-16-16-07-33
.. nonce: TRTTek
.. section: Library

Add missing ``NoReturn`` to ``__all__`` in typing.py

..

.. bpo: 33078
.. date: 2018-03-15-07-38-00
.. nonce: RmjUF5
.. section: Library

Fix the size handling in multiprocessing.Queue when a pickling error occurs.

..

.. bpo: 33064
.. date: 2018-03-12-19-58-25
.. nonce: LO2KIY
.. section: Library

lib2to3 now properly supports trailing commas after ``*args`` and
``**kwargs`` in function signatures.

..

.. bpo: 33056
.. date: 2018-03-12-16-40-00
.. nonce: lNN9Eh
.. section: Library

FIX properly close leaking fds in concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor.

..

.. bpo: 33021
.. date: 2018-03-12-00-27-56
.. nonce: m19B9T
.. section: Library

Release the GIL during fstat() calls, avoiding hang of all threads when
calling mmap.mmap(), os.urandom(), and random.seed().  Patch by Nir Soffer.

..

.. bpo: 31804
.. date: 2018-03-11-19-03-52
.. nonce: i8KUMp
.. section: Library

Avoid failing in multiprocessing.Process if the standard streams are closed
or None at exit.

..

.. bpo: 33037
.. date: 2018-03-09-23-07-07
.. nonce: nAJ3at
.. section: Library

Skip sending/receiving data after SSL transport closing.

..

.. bpo: 27683
.. date: 2018-03-07-22-28-17
.. nonce: 572Rv4
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in :mod:`ipaddress` that result of :meth:`hosts` is empty
when the network is constructed by a tuple containing an integer mask and
only 1 bit left for addresses.

..

.. bpo: 32999
.. date: 2018-03-06-20-30-20
.. nonce: lgFXWl
.. section: Library

Fix C implementation of ``ABC.__subclasscheck__(cls, subclass)`` crashed when
``subclass`` is not a type object.

..

.. bpo: 33009
.. date: 2018-03-06-11-54-59
.. nonce: -Ekysb
.. section: Library

Fix inspect.signature() for single-parameter partialmethods.

..

.. bpo: 32969
.. date: 2018-03-06-00-19-41
.. nonce: rGTKa0
.. section: Library

Expose several missing constants in zlib and fix corresponding
documentation.

..

.. bpo: 32056
.. date: 2018-03-01-17-49-56
.. nonce: IlpfgE
.. section: Library

Improved exceptions raised for invalid number of channels and sample width
when read an audio file in modules :mod:`!aifc`, :mod:`wave` and
:mod:`!sunau`.

..

.. bpo: 32844
.. date: 2018-02-28-13-08-00
.. nonce: u8tnAe
.. section: Library

Fix wrong redirection of a low descriptor (0 or 1) to stderr in subprocess
if another low descriptor is closed.

..

.. bpo: 32857
.. date: 2018-02-16-14-37-14
.. nonce: -XljAx
.. section: Library

In :mod:`tkinter`, ``after_cancel(None)`` now raises a :exc:`ValueError`
instead of canceling the first scheduled function.  Patch by Cheryl Sabella.

..

.. bpo: 31639
.. date: 2017-12-27-21-55-19
.. nonce: l3avDJ
.. section: Library

http.server now exposes a ThreadedHTTPServer class and uses it when the
module is run with ``-m`` to cope with web browsers pre-opening sockets.

..

.. bpo: 27645
.. date: 2017-10-05-20-41-48
.. nonce: 1Y_Wag
.. section: Library

:class:`sqlite3.Connection` now exposes a
:class:`~sqlite3.Connection.backup` method, if the underlying SQLite library
is at version 3.6.11 or higher.  Patch by Lele Gaifax.

..

.. bpo: 33126
.. date: 2018-03-28-17-03-17
.. nonce: 5UGkNv
.. section: Documentation

Document PyBuffer_ToContiguous().

..

.. bpo: 27212
.. date: 2018-03-22-19-23-04
.. nonce: wrE5KR
.. section: Documentation

Modify documentation for the :func:`islice` recipe to consume initial values
up to the start index.

..

.. bpo: 28247
.. date: 2018-03-20-20-11-05
.. nonce: -V-WS-
.. section: Documentation

Update :mod:`zipapp` documentation to describe how to make standalone
applications.

..

.. bpo: 18802
.. date: 2018-03-11-18-53-47
.. nonce: JhAqH3
.. section: Documentation

Documentation changes for ipaddress.  Patch by Jon Foster and Berker Peksag.

..

.. bpo: 27428
.. date: 2018-03-11-00-16-56
.. nonce: B7A8FT
.. section: Documentation

Update documentation to clarify that ``WindowsRegistryFinder`` implements
``MetaPathFinder``. (Patch by Himanshu Lakhara)

..

.. bpo: 32872
.. date: 2018-03-28-01-35-02
.. nonce: J5NDUj
.. section: Tests

Avoid regrtest compatibility issue with namespace packages.

..

.. bpo: 32517
.. date: 2018-03-09-07-05-12
.. nonce: ugc1iW
.. section: Tests

Fix failing ``test_asyncio`` on macOS 10.12.2+ due to transport of
``KqueueSelector`` loop was not being closed.

..

.. bpo: 19417
.. date: 2018-01-08-13-33-47
.. nonce: 2asoXy
.. section: Tests

Add test_bdb.py.

..

.. bpo: 33163
.. date: 2018-03-28-04-15-03
.. nonce: hfpWuU
.. section: Build

Upgrade pip to 9.0.3 and setuptools to v39.0.1.

..

.. bpo: 33016
.. date: 2018-03-07-01-33-33
.. nonce: Z_Med0
.. section: Windows

Fix potential use of uninitialized memory in nt._getfinalpathname

..

.. bpo: 32903
.. date: 2018-02-28-11-03-24
.. nonce: 1SXY4t
.. section: Windows

Fix a memory leak in os.chdir() on Windows if the current directory is set
to a UNC path.

..

.. bpo: 32726
.. date: 2018-03-29-06-56-12
.. nonce: urS9uX
.. section: macOS

Build and link with private copy of Tcl/Tk 8.6 for the macOS 10.6+
installer. The 10.9+ installer variant already does this.  This means that
the Python 3.7 provided by the python.org macOS installers no longer need or
use any external versions of Tcl/Tk, either system-provided or
user-installed, such as ActiveTcl.

..

.. bpo: 32984
.. date: 2018-03-05-01-29-05
.. nonce: NGjgT4
.. section: IDLE

Set ``__file__`` while running a startup file.  Like Python, IDLE optionally
runs one startup file in the Shell window before presenting the first
interactive input prompt.  For IDLE, ``-s`` runs a file named in
environmental variable  :envvar:`IDLESTARTUP` or  :envvar:`PYTHONSTARTUP`;
``-r file`` runs ``file``.  Python sets ``__file__`` to the startup file
name before running the file and unsets it before the first prompt.  IDLE
now does the same when run normally, without the ``-n`` option.

..

.. bpo: 32940
.. date: 2018-02-24-18-20-50
.. nonce: ZaJ1Rf
.. section: IDLE

Simplify and rename StringTranslatePseudoMapping in pyparse.

..

.. bpo: 32885
.. date: 2018-02-20-12-16-47
.. nonce: dL5x7C
.. section: Tools/Demos

Add an ``-n`` flag for ``Tools/scripts/pathfix.py`` to disable automatic
backup creation (files with ``~`` suffix).

..

.. bpo: 33042
.. date: 2018-03-20-21-43-09
.. nonce: FPFp64
.. section: C API

Embedding applications may once again call PySys_ResetWarnOptions,
PySys_AddWarnOption, and PySys_AddXOption prior to calling Py_Initialize.

..

.. bpo: 32374
.. date: 2018-01-09-17-03-54
.. nonce: SwwLoz
.. section: C API

Document that m_traverse for multi-phase initialized modules can be called
with m_state=NULL, and add a sanity check
