.. bpo: 41304
.. date: 2020-07-15-20-15-08
.. nonce: vNEeYA
.. release date: 2020-08-15
.. section: Security

Fixes `python3x._pth` being ignored on Windows, caused by the fix for
:issue:`29778` (CVE-2020-15801).

..

.. bpo: 29778
.. date: 2020-07-03-17-21-37
.. nonce: cR_fGS
.. section: Security

Ensure :file:`python3.dll` is loaded from correct locations when Python is
embedded (CVE-2020-15523).

..

.. bpo: 41004
.. date: 2020-06-29-16-02-29
.. nonce: ovF0KZ
.. section: Security

CVE-2020-14422: The __hash__() methods of  ipaddress.IPv4Interface and
ipaddress.IPv6Interface incorrectly generated constant hash values of 32 and
128 respectively. This resulted in always causing hash collisions. The fix
uses hash() to generate hash values for the tuple of (address, mask length,
network address).

..

.. bpo: 39603
.. date: 2020-02-12-14-17-39
.. nonce: Gt3RSg
.. section: Security

Prevent http header injection by rejecting control characters in
http.client.putrequest(...).

..

.. bpo: 33786
.. date: 2018-06-06-23-24-40
.. nonce: lBvT8z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix asynchronous generators to handle GeneratorExit in athrow() correctly

..

.. bpo: 41288
.. date: 2020-07-13-15-06-35
.. nonce: 8mn5P-
.. section: Library

Unpickling invalid NEWOBJ_EX opcode with the C implementation raises now
UnpicklingError instead of crashing.

..

.. bpo: 39017
.. date: 2020-07-12-22-16-58
.. nonce: x3Cg-9
.. section: Library

Avoid infinite loop when reading specially crafted TAR files using the
tarfile module (CVE-2019-20907).

..

.. bpo: 41235
.. date: 2020-07-07-21-56-26
.. nonce: H2csMU
.. section: Library

Fix the error handling in :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.load_dh_params`.

..

.. bpo: 41100
.. date: 2020-08-15-00-33-27
.. nonce: AksBg1
.. section: macOS

Additional fixes for testing on macOS 11 Big Sur Intel. Note: macOS 11 is
not yet released, this release of Python is not fully supported on 11.0, and
not all tests pass.
