.. bpo: 38243
.. date: 2019-09-25-13-21-09
.. nonce: 1pfz24
.. release date: 2019-10-01
.. section: Security

Escape the server title of :class:`xmlrpc.server.DocXMLRPCServer` when
rendering the document page as HTML. (Contributed by Dong-hee Na in
:issue:`38243`.)

..

.. bpo: 38174
.. date: 2019-09-23-21-02-46
.. nonce: MeWuJd
.. section: Security

Update vendorized expat library version to 2.2.8, which resolves
CVE-2019-15903.

..

.. bpo: 37764
.. date: 2019-08-27-01-13-05
.. nonce: qv67PQ
.. section: Security

Fixes email._header_value_parser.get_unstructured going into an infinite
loop for a specific case in which the email header does not have trailing
whitespace, and the case in which it contains an invalid encoded word. Patch
by Ashwin Ramaswami.

..

.. bpo: 37461
.. date: 2019-07-16-08-11-00
.. nonce: 1Ahz7O
.. section: Security

Fix an infinite loop when parsing specially crafted email headers. Patch by
Abhilash Raj.

..

.. bpo: 34155
.. date: 2019-05-04-13-33-37
.. nonce: MJll68
.. section: Security

Fix parsing of invalid email addresses with more than one ``@`` (e.g.
a@b@c.com.) to not return the part before 2nd ``@`` as valid email address.
Patch by maxking & jpic.

..

.. bpo: 36871
.. date: 2019-09-24-18-45-46
.. nonce: p47knk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Improve error handling for the assert_has_calls method of mocks. Fixed a bug
where any errors encountered while binding the expected calls to the mock's
spec were silently swallowed, leading to misleading error output.

..

.. bpo: 38013
.. date: 2019-09-12-19-50-01
.. nonce: I7btD0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Allow to call ``async_generator_athrow().throw(...)`` even for non-started
async generator helper. It fixes annoying warning at the end of
:func:`asyncio.run` call.

..

.. bpo: 38124
.. date: 2019-09-12-00-14-01
.. nonce: n6E0H7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an off-by-one error in PyState_AddModule that could cause out-of-bounds
memory access.

..

.. bpo: 36946
.. date: 2019-09-02-16-17-42
.. nonce: _lAuSR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible signed integer overflow when handling slices. Patch by
hongweipeng.

..

.. bpo: 37409
.. date: 2019-08-06-23-39-05
.. nonce: 1qwzn2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Ensure explicit relative imports from interactive sessions and scripts
(having no parent package) always raise ImportError, rather than treating
the current module as the package. Patch by Ben Lewis.

..

.. bpo: 36311
.. date: 2019-08-02-15-01-33
.. nonce: uY5vt-
.. section: Core and Builtins

Decoding bytes objects larger than 2GiB is faster and no longer fails when a
multibyte characters spans a chunk boundary.

..

.. bpo: 37467
.. date: 2019-07-01-12-22-44
.. nonce: u-XyEu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`sys.excepthook` and :c:func:`PyErr_Display` if a filename is a
bytes string. For example, for a SyntaxError exception where the filename
attribute is a bytes string.

..

.. bpo: 37417
.. date: 2019-06-26-18-41-00
.. nonce: VsZeHL
.. section: Core and Builtins

:meth:`bytearray.extend` now correctly handles errors that arise during
iteration. Patch by Brandt Bucher.

..

.. bpo: 20523
.. date: 2019-02-15-20-42-36
.. nonce: rRLrvr
.. section: Core and Builtins

``pdb.Pdb`` supports ~/.pdbrc in Windows 7. Patch by Tim Hopper and Dan
Lidral-Porter.

..

.. bpo: 38019
.. date: 2019-09-29-13-50-24
.. nonce: 6MoOE3
.. section: Library

Correctly handle pause/resume reading of closed asyncio unix pipe.

..

.. bpo: 38216
.. date: 2019-09-27-15-24-45
.. nonce: -7yvZR
.. section: Library

Allow the rare code that wants to send invalid http requests from the
`http.client` library a way to do so.  The fixes for bpo-30458 led to
breakage for some projects that were relying on this ability to test their
own behavior in the face of bad requests.

..

.. bpo: 38191
.. date: 2019-09-17-12-28-27
.. nonce: 1TU0HV
.. section: Library

Constructor of :class:`~typing.NamedTuple` type now accepts arbitrary
keyword argument names, including "cls", "self", "typename" and "fields".

..

.. bpo: 38185
.. date: 2019-09-16-19-12-57
.. nonce: zYWppY
.. section: Library

Fixed case-insensitive string comparison in :class:`sqlite3.Row` indexing.

..

.. bpo: 38175
.. date: 2019-09-15-10-30-33
.. nonce: 61XlUv
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in comparison of :class:`sqlite3.Row` objects.

..

.. bpo: 33936
.. date: 2019-09-14-10-34-00
.. nonce: 8wCI_n
.. section: Library

_hashlib no longer calls obsolete OpenSSL initialization function with
OpenSSL 1.1.0+.

..

.. bpo: 34706
.. date: 2019-09-13-14-54-33
.. nonce: HWVpOY
.. section: Library

Preserve subclassing in inspect.Signature.from_callable.

..

.. bpo: 38059
.. date: 2019-09-08-11-36-50
.. nonce: 8SA6co
.. section: Library

inspect.py now uses sys.exit() instead of exit()

..

.. bpo: 38006
.. date: 2019-09-02-13-37-27
.. nonce: Y7vA0Q
.. section: Library

weakref.WeakValueDictionary defines a local remove() function used as
callback for weak references. This function was created with a closure.
Modify the implementation to avoid the closure.

..

.. bpo: 34410
.. date: 2019-08-31-01-52-59
.. nonce: 7KbWZQ
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in the :func:`tee` iterator when re-enter it. RuntimeError is
now raised in this case.

..

.. bpo: 37965
.. date: 2019-08-28-14-04-18
.. nonce: 7xGE-C
.. section: Library

Fix C compiler warning caused by distutils.ccompiler.CCompiler.has_function.

..

.. bpo: 36205
.. date: 2019-08-27-03-53-26
.. nonce: AfkGRl
.. section: Library

Fix the rusage implementation of time.process_time() to correctly report the
sum of the system and user CPU time.

..

.. bpo: 22347
.. date: 2019-08-27-01-03-26
.. nonce: _TRpYr
.. section: Library

Update mimetypes.guess_type to allow proper parsing of URLs with only a host
name. Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 37950
.. date: 2019-08-26-10-45-51
.. nonce: -K1IKT
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`ast.dump` when call with incompletely initialized node.

..

.. bpo: 37915
.. date: 2019-08-22-16-13-27
.. nonce: xyoZI5
.. section: Library

Fix a segmentation fault that appeared when comparing instances of
``datetime.timezone`` and ``datetime.tzinfo`` objects. Patch by Pablo
Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 37885
.. date: 2019-08-19-10-31-41
.. nonce: 4Nc9sp
.. section: Library

venv: Don't generate unset variable warning on deactivate.

..

.. bpo: 37868
.. date: 2019-08-17-22-33-54
.. nonce: hp64fi
.. section: Library

Fix dataclasses.is_dataclass when given an instance that never raises
AttributeError in __getattr__.  That is, an object that returns something
for __dataclass_fields__ even if it's not a dataclass.

..

.. bpo: 37811
.. date: 2019-08-14-21-41-07
.. nonce: d1xYj7
.. section: Library

Fix ``socket`` module's ``socket.connect(address)`` function being unable to
establish connection in case of interrupted system call. The problem was
observed on all OSes which ``poll(2)`` system call can take only
non-negative integers and -1 as a timeout value.

..

.. bpo: 21131
.. date: 2019-08-14-15-34-23
.. nonce: 0MMQRi
.. section: Library

Fix ``faulthandler.register(chain=True)`` stack. faulthandler now allocates
a dedicated stack of ``SIGSTKSZ*2`` bytes, instead of just ``SIGSTKSZ``
bytes. Calling the previous signal handler in faulthandler signal handler
uses more than ``SIGSTKSZ`` bytes of stack memory on some platforms.

..

.. bpo: 34621
.. date: 2019-08-04-22-06-54
.. nonce: E2EWkw
.. section: Library

Fixed unpickle-ability in older Python versions (<3.7) of UUID objects with
``is_safe`` set to ``SafeUUID.unknown``.

..

.. bpo: 37738
.. date: 2019-08-01-17-11-16
.. nonce: A3WWcT
.. section: Library

Fix the implementation of curses ``addch(str, color_pair)``: pass the color
pair to ``setcchar()``, instead of always passing 0 as the color pair.

..

.. bpo: 37723
.. date: 2019-07-31-16-49-01
.. nonce: zq6tw8
.. section: Library

Fix performance regression on regular expression parsing with huge character
sets. Patch by Yann Vaginay.

..

.. bpo: 32178
.. date: 2019-07-30-22-41-05
.. nonce: X-IFLe
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError in :mod:`email` package when trying to parse invalid address
fields starting with ``:``.

..

.. bpo: 37685
.. date: 2019-07-28-22-25-25
.. nonce: _3bN9f
.. section: Library

Fixed comparisons of :class:`datetime.timedelta` and
:class:`datetime.timezone`.

..

.. bpo: 37695
.. date: 2019-07-27-20-21-03
.. nonce: QANdvg
.. section: Library

Correct :func:`curses.unget_wch` error message.  Patch by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 29553
.. date: 2019-07-27-10-14-45
.. nonce: TVeIDe
.. section: Library

Fixed :meth:`argparse.ArgumentParser.format_usage` for mutually exclusive
groups. Patch by Andrew Nester.

..

.. bpo: 37664
.. date: 2019-07-24-18-27-44
.. nonce: o-GYZC
.. section: Library

Update wheels bundled with ensurepip (pip 19.2.3 and setuptools 41.2.0)

..

.. bpo: 37642
.. date: 2019-07-21-20-59-31
.. nonce: L61Bvy
.. section: Library

Allowed the pure Python implementation of :class:`datetime.timezone` to
represent sub-minute offsets close to minimum and maximum boundaries,
specifically in the ranges (23:59, 24:00) and (-23:59, 24:00). Patch by
Ngalim Siregar

..

.. bpo: 37491
.. date: 2019-07-17-06-54-43
.. nonce: op0aMs
.. section: Library

Fix ``IndexError`` when parsing email headers with unexpectedly ending
bare-quoted string value. Patch by Abhilash Raj.

..

.. bpo: 18378
.. date: 2019-07-13-13-40-12
.. nonce: NHcojp
.. section: Library

Recognize "UTF-8" as a valid value for LC_CTYPE in locale._parse_localename.

..

.. bpo: 37579
.. date: 2019-07-13-10-59-43
.. nonce: B1Tq9i
.. section: Library

Return :exc:`NotImplemented` in Python implementation of ``__eq__`` for
:class:`~datetime.timedelta` and :class:`~datetime.time` when the other
object being compared is not of the same type to match C implementation.
Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 21478
.. date: 2019-07-10-23-07-11
.. nonce: cCw9rF
.. section: Library

Record calls to parent when autospecced object is attached to a mock using
:func:`unittest.mock.attach_mock`. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 37531
.. date: 2019-07-09-19-38-26
.. nonce: GX7s8S
.. section: Library

"python3 -m test -jN --timeout=TIMEOUT" now kills a worker process if it
runs longer than *TIMEOUT* seconds.

..

.. bpo: 37482
.. date: 2019-07-09-11-20-21
.. nonce: auzvev
.. section: Library

Fix serialization of display name in originator or destination address
fields with both encoded words and special chars.

..

.. bpo: 37424
.. date: 2019-07-04-13-00-20
.. nonce: 0i1MR-
.. section: Library

Fixes a possible hang when using a timeout on `subprocess.run()` while
capturing output.  If the child process spawned its own children or
otherwise connected its stdout or stderr handles with another process, we
could hang after the timeout was reached and our child was killed when
attempting to read final output from the pipes.

..

.. bpo: 37421
.. date: 2019-07-03-12-47-52
.. nonce: gR5hC8
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`multiprocessing.util.get_temp_dir` finalizer: clear also the
'tempdir' configuration of the current process, so next call to
``get_temp_dir()`` will create a new temporary directory, rather than
reusing the removed temporary directory.

..

.. bpo: 37420
.. date: 2019-06-26-22-25-05
.. nonce: CxFJ09
.. section: Library

:func:`os.sched_setaffinity` now correctly handles errors that arise during
iteration over its ``mask`` argument. Patch by Brandt Bucher.

..

.. bpo: 29412
.. date: 2019-06-25-19-27-25
.. nonce: n4Zqdh
.. section: Library

Fix IndexError in parsing a header value ending unexpectedly. Patch by
Abhilash Raj.

..

.. bpo: 37372
.. date: 2019-06-22-12-30-00
.. nonce: kIKqZ6
.. section: Library

Fix error unpickling datetime.time objects from Python 2 with seconds>=24.
Patch by Justin Blanchard.

..

.. bpo: 27860
.. date: 2019-06-18-21-25-23
.. nonce: Mc4wtK
.. section: Library

Fix ``IPv4Interface`` and ``IPv6Interface`` didn't accept string mask when
the argument is tuple.

..

.. bpo: 33972
.. date: 2019-06-15-14-39-50
.. nonce: XxnNPw
.. section: Library

Email with single part but content-type set to ``multipart/*`` doesn't raise
AttributeError anymore.

..

.. bpo: 21872
.. date: 2019-06-12-08-56-22
.. nonce: V9QGGN
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`lzma`: module decompresses data incompletely. When decompressing a
FORMAT_ALONE format file, and it doesn't have the end marker, sometimes the
last one to dozens bytes can't be output. Patch by Ma Lin.

..

.. bpo: 12144
.. date: 2019-06-08-23-26-58
.. nonce: Z7mz-q
.. section: Library

Ensure cookies with ``expires`` attribute are handled in
:meth:`CookieJar.make_cookies`.

..

.. bpo: 37163
.. date: 2019-06-07-08-18-05
.. nonce: 36JkUh
.. section: Library

:func:`dataclasses.replace` now supports the field named "obj".

..

.. bpo: 36871
.. date: 2019-05-12-12-58-37
.. nonce: 6xiEHZ
.. section: Library

Ensure method signature is used instead of constructor signature of a class
while asserting mock object against method calls. Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 36564
.. date: 2019-04-08-13-00-13
.. nonce: _n67m_
.. section: Library

Fix infinite loop in email header folding logic that would be triggered when
an email policy's max_line_length is not long enough to include the required
markup and any values in the message. Patch by Paul Ganssle

..

.. bpo: 35168
.. date: 2019-01-22-09-23-20
.. nonce: UGv2yW
.. section: Library

:attr:`shlex.shlex.punctuation_chars` is now a read-only property.

..

.. bpo: 20504
.. date: 2018-11-21-18-05-50
.. nonce: kG0ub5
.. section: Library

Fixes a bug in :mod:`cgi` module when a multipart/form-data request has no
`Content-Length` header.

..

.. bpo: 4963
.. date: 2017-08-15-11-24-41
.. nonce: LRYres
.. section: Library

Fixed non-deterministic behavior related to mimetypes extension mapping and
module reinitialization.

..

.. bpo: 26868
.. date: 2019-09-07-15-55-46
.. nonce: Raw0Gd
.. section: Documentation

Fix example usage of :c:func:`PyModule_AddObject` to properly handle errors.

..

.. bpo: 37979
.. date: 2019-08-29-10-40-05
.. nonce: TAUx_E
.. section: Documentation

Added a link to dateutil.parser.isoparse in the datetime.fromisoformat
documentation. Patch by Paul Ganssle

..

.. bpo: 37937
.. date: 2019-08-24-12-59-06
.. nonce: F7fHbt
.. section: Documentation

Mention ``frame.f_trace`` in :func:`sys.settrace` docs.

..

.. bpo: 37726
.. date: 2019-07-31-11-40-06
.. nonce: h-3o9a
.. section: Documentation

Stop recommending getopt in the tutorial for command line argument parsing
and promote argparse.

..

.. bpo: 32910
.. date: 2019-07-25-10-30-32
.. nonce: caLLAe
.. section: Documentation

Remove implementation-specific behaviour of how venv's Deactivate works.

..

.. bpo: 37256
.. date: 2019-07-16-14-48-12
.. nonce: qJTrBb
.. section: Documentation

Fix wording of arguments for :class:`Request` in :mod:`urllib.request`

..

.. bpo: 37284
.. date: 2019-07-13-12-58-20
.. nonce: rP8WpB
.. section: Documentation

Add a brief note to indicate that any new ``sys.implementation`` required
attributes must go through the PEP process.

..

.. bpo: 30088
.. date: 2019-07-13-12-43-01
.. nonce: CIcBjy
.. section: Documentation

Documented that :class:`mailbox.Maildir` constructor doesn't attempt to
verify the maildir folder layout correctness. Patch by Sviatoslav Sydorenko.

..

.. bpo: 37487
.. date: 2019-07-06-17-19-26
.. nonce: QagfZ5
.. section: Documentation

Fix PyList_GetItem index description to include 0.

..

.. bpo: 37478
.. date: 2019-07-06-00-57-27
.. nonce: B0ioLw
.. section: Documentation

Added possible exceptions to the description of os.chdir().

..

.. bpo: 37004
.. date: 2019-05-22-04-30-07
.. nonce: BRgxrt
.. section: Documentation

In the documentation for difflib, a note was added explicitly warning that
the results of SequenceMatcher's ratio method may depend on the order of the
input strings.

..

.. bpo: 35803
.. date: 2019-01-21-14-30-59
.. nonce: yae6Lq
.. section: Documentation

Document and test that ``tempfile`` functions may accept a :term:`path-like
object` for the ``dir`` argument.  Patch by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 34293
.. date: 2018-07-31-15-38-26
.. nonce: yHupAL
.. section: Documentation

Fix the Doc/Makefile regarding PAPER environment variable and PDF builds

..

.. bpo: 38239
.. date: 2019-09-26-15-48-36
.. nonce: MfoVzY
.. section: Tests

Fix test_gdb for Link Time Optimization (LTO) builds.

..

.. bpo: 38275
.. date: 2019-09-25-14-40-57
.. nonce: -kdveI
.. section: Tests

test_ssl now handles disabled TLS/SSL versions better. OpenSSL's crypto
policy and run-time settings are recognized and tests for disabled versions
are skipped. Tests also accept more TLS minimum_versions for platforms that
override OpenSSL's default with strict settings.

..

.. bpo: 38271
.. date: 2019-09-25-13-11-29
.. nonce: iHXNIg
.. section: Tests

The private keys for test_ssl were encrypted with 3DES in traditional PKCS#5
format. 3DES and the digest algorithm of PKCS#5 are blocked by some strict
crypto policies. Use PKCS#8 format with AES256 encryption instead.

..

.. bpo: 37123
.. date: 2019-09-24-12-30-55
.. nonce: IoutBn
.. section: Tests

Multiprocessing test test_mymanager() now also expects -SIGTERM, not only
exitcode 0. BaseManager._finalize_manager() sends SIGTERM to the manager
process if it takes longer than 1 second to stop, which happens on slow
buildbots.

..

.. bpo: 38212
.. date: 2019-09-24-12-24-05
.. nonce: IWbhWz
.. section: Tests

Multiprocessing tests: increase test_queue_feeder_donot_stop_onexc() timeout
from 1 to 60 seconds.

..

.. bpo: 38117
.. date: 2019-09-11-17-22-32
.. nonce: X7LgGY
.. section: Tests

Test with OpenSSL 1.1.1d

..

.. bpo: 37805
.. date: 2019-08-25-19-51-46
.. nonce: Kl1sti
.. section: Tests

Add tests for json.dump(..., skipkeys=True). Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 37531
.. date: 2019-08-20-19-24-19
.. nonce: wRoXfU
.. section: Tests

Enhance regrtest multiprocess timeout: write a message when killing a worker
process, catch popen.kill() and popen.wait() exceptions, put a timeout on
the second call to popen.communicate().

..

.. bpo: 37335
.. date: 2019-06-28-16-54-46
.. nonce: LLzOx8
.. section: Tests

Improve locale coercion tests by using codec lookup instead of more fragile
replace().

..

.. bpo: 37411
.. date: 2019-06-26-15-28-45
.. nonce: 5lGNhM
.. section: Tests

Fix test_wsgiref.testEnviron() to no longer depend on the environment
variables (don't fail if "X" variable is set).

..

.. bpo: 37400
.. date: 2019-06-25-16-02-43
.. nonce: cx_EWv
.. section: Tests

Fix test_os.test_chown(): use os.getgroups() rather than grp.getgrall() to
get groups. Rename also the test to test_chown_gid().

..

.. bpo: 37359
.. date: 2019-06-24-10-47-07
.. nonce: CkdtyO
.. section: Tests

Add --cleanup option to python3 -m test to remove ``test_python_*``
directories of previous failed jobs. Add "make cleantest" to run ``python3
-m test --cleanup``.

..

.. bpo: 37362
.. date: 2019-06-21-15-47-33
.. nonce: D3xppx
.. section: Tests

test_gdb no longer fails if it gets an "unexpected" message on stderr: it
now ignores stderr. The purpose of test_gdb is to test that python-gdb.py
commands work as expected, not to test gdb.

..

.. bpo: 36919
.. date: 2019-05-28-15-41-34
.. nonce: -vGt_m
.. section: Tests

Make ``test_source_encoding.test_issue2301`` implementation independent. The
test will work now for both CPython and IronPython.

..

.. bpo: 34720
.. date: 2018-12-26-12-31-16
.. nonce: T268vz
.. section: Tests

Assert m_state != NULL to mimic GC traversal functions that do not correctly
handle module creation when the module state has not been created.

..

.. bpo: 34347
.. date: 2018-08-25-13-28-18
.. nonce: IsRDPB
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_utf8_mode.test_cmd_line`` for AIX.  Patch by M. Felt

..

.. bpo: 38301
.. date: 2019-09-28-02-37-11
.. nonce: 123456
.. section: Build

In Solaris family, we must be sure to use ``-D_REENTRANT``. Patch by Jesús
Cea Avión.

..

.. bpo: 36002
.. date: 2019-09-13-14-12-36
.. nonce: Bcl4oe
.. section: Build

Locate ``llvm-profdata`` and ``llvm-ar`` binaries using ``AC_PATH_TOOL``
rather than ``AC_PATH_TARGET_TOOL``.

..

.. bpo: 37936
.. date: 2019-08-24-00-29-40
.. nonce: QrORqA
.. section: Build

The :file:`.gitignore` file no longer applies to any files that are in fact
tracked in the Git repository.  Patch by Greg Price.

..

.. bpo: 38117
.. date: 2019-09-16-14-07-11
.. nonce: hJVf0C
.. section: Windows

Update bundled OpenSSL to 1.1.1d

..

.. bpo: 36634
.. date: 2019-09-11-12-34-31
.. nonce: xLaGgb
.. section: Windows

venv activate.bat now works when the existing variables contain double quote
characters.

..

.. bpo: 38087
.. date: 2019-09-10-14-21-40
.. nonce: --eIib
.. section: Windows

Fix case sensitivity in test_pathlib and test_ntpath.

..

.. bpo: 38088
.. date: 2019-09-10-14-17-25
.. nonce: FOvWSM
.. section: Windows

Fixes distutils not finding vcruntime140.dll with only the v142 toolset
installed.

..

.. bpo: 37283
.. date: 2019-09-09-12-22-23
.. nonce: 8NvOkU
.. section: Windows

Ensure command-line and unattend.xml setting override previously detected
states in Windows installer.

..

.. bpo: 37705
.. date: 2019-08-30-15-15-22
.. nonce: 2o4NWW
.. section: Windows

Improve the implementation of ``winerror_to_errno()``.

..

.. bpo: 37549
.. date: 2019-08-22-09-04-44
.. nonce: TpKI3M
.. section: Windows

:func:`os.dup` no longer fails for standard streams on Windows 7.

..

.. bpo: 37702
.. date: 2019-07-29-16-49-31
.. nonce: Lj2f5e
.. section: Windows

Fix memory leak on Windows in creating an SSLContext object or running
urllib.request.urlopen('https://...').

..

.. bpo: 10945
.. date: 2019-07-01-12-38-48
.. nonce: s0YBHG
.. section: Windows

Officially drop support for creating bdist_wininst installers on non-Windows
systems.

..

.. bpo: 37445
.. date: 2019-06-28-18-10-29
.. nonce: LsdYO6
.. section: Windows

Include the ``FORMAT_MESSAGE_IGNORE_INSERTS`` flag in ``FormatMessageW()``
calls.

..

.. bpo: 37380
.. date: 2019-06-25-04-15-22
.. nonce: tPxjuz
.. section: Windows

Don't collect unfinished processes with ``subprocess._active`` on Windows to
cleanup later. Patch by Ruslan Kuprieiev.

..

.. bpo: 32587
.. date: 2019-05-10-15-25-44
.. nonce: -0g2O3
.. section: Windows

Make :data:`winreg.REG_MULTI_SZ` support zero-length strings.

..

.. bpo: 38117
.. date: 2019-09-15-21-29-13
.. nonce: ZLsoAZ
.. section: macOS

Updated OpenSSL to 1.1.1d in macOS installer.

..

.. bpo: 38089
.. date: 2019-09-10-14-24-35
.. nonce: eedgyD
.. section: macOS

Move Azure Pipelines to latest VM versions and make macOS tests optional

..

.. bpo: 35379
.. date: 2019-09-17-01-28-56
.. nonce: yAECDr
.. section: IDLE

When exiting IDLE, catch any AttributeError.  One happens when
EditorWindow.close is called twice.  Printing a traceback, when IDLE is run
from a terminal, is useless and annoying.

..

.. bpo: 38183
.. date: 2019-09-16-15-04-29
.. nonce: eudCN1
.. section: IDLE

To avoid problems, test_idle ignores the user config directory. It no longer
tries to create or access .idlerc or any files within. Users must run IDLE
to discover problems with saving settings.

..

.. bpo: 38077
.. date: 2019-09-09-22-08-36
.. nonce: Mzpfe2
.. section: IDLE

IDLE no longer adds 'argv' to the user namespace when initializing it.  This
bug only affected 3.7.4 and 3.8.0b2 to 3.8.0b4.

..

.. bpo: 38041
.. date: 2019-09-05-23-12-13
.. nonce: nxmGGK
.. section: IDLE

Shell restart lines now fill the window width, always start with '=', and
avoid wrapping unnecessarily. The line will still wrap if the included file
name is long relative to the width.

..

.. bpo: 35771
.. date: 2019-09-01-10-22-55
.. nonce: tdbmbP
.. section: IDLE

To avoid occasional spurious test_idle failures on slower machines, increase
the ``hover_delay`` in test_tooltip.

..

.. bpo: 37824
.. date: 2019-08-26-00-41-53
.. nonce: YY5jAI
.. section: IDLE

Properly handle user input warnings in IDLE shell. Cease turning
SyntaxWarnings into SyntaxErrors.

..

.. bpo: 37929
.. date: 2019-08-24-22-00-33
.. nonce: jb7523
.. section: IDLE

IDLE Settings dialog now closes properly when there is no shell window.

..

.. bpo: 37902
.. date: 2019-08-21-16-02-49
.. nonce: _R_adE
.. section: IDLE

Add mousewheel scrolling for IDLE module, path, and stack browsers. Patch by
George Zhang.

..

.. bpo: 37849
.. date: 2019-08-14-09-43-15
.. nonce: -bcYF3
.. section: IDLE

Fixed completions list appearing too high or low when shown above the
current line.

..

.. bpo: 36419
.. date: 2019-08-04-17-10-01
.. nonce: TJZqOc
.. section: IDLE

Refactor IDLE autocomplete and improve testing.

..

.. bpo: 37748
.. date: 2019-08-04-15-27-50
.. nonce: 0vf6pg
.. section: IDLE

Reorder the Run menu.  Put the most common choice, Run Module, at the top.

..

.. bpo: 37692
.. date: 2019-07-27-15-14-20
.. nonce: TRHGjD
.. section: IDLE

Improve highlight config sample with example shell interaction and better
labels for shell elements.

..

.. bpo: 37628
.. date: 2019-07-26-17-51-13
.. nonce: kX4AUF
.. section: IDLE

Settings dialog no longer expands with font size.

..

.. bpo: 37627
.. date: 2019-07-20-23-33-53
.. nonce: dQhUNB
.. section: IDLE

Initialize the Customize Run dialog with the command line arguments most
recently entered before.  The user can optionally edit before submitting
them.

..

.. bpo: 33610
.. date: 2019-07-18-10-11-36
.. nonce: xYqMLg
.. section: IDLE

Fix code context not showing the correct context when first toggled on.

..

.. bpo: 37530
.. date: 2019-07-11-00-05-31
.. nonce: AuyCyD
.. section: IDLE

Optimize code context to reduce unneeded background activity. Font and
highlight changes now occur along with text changes instead of after a
random delay.

..

.. bpo: 27452
.. date: 2019-07-03-22-47-44
.. nonce: nePPLi
.. section: IDLE

Cleanup ``config.py`` by inlining ``RemoveFile`` and simplifying the
handling of ``file`` in ``CreateConfigHandlers``.

..

.. bpo: 37325
.. date: 2019-06-18-16-40-05
.. nonce: GssOf1
.. section: IDLE

Fix tab focus traversal order for help source and custom run dialogs.

..

.. bpo: 17535
.. date: 2019-06-13-01-07-20
.. nonce: K8i2St
.. section: IDLE

Add optional line numbers for IDLE editor windows.  Windows open without
line numbers unless set otherwise in the General tab of the configuration
dialog.

..

.. bpo: 26806
.. date: 2019-06-10-22-48-50
.. nonce: Zltkum
.. section: IDLE

To compensate for stack frames added by IDLE and avoid possible problems
with low recursion limits, add 30 to limits in the user code execution
process.  Subtract 30 when reporting recursion limits to make this addition
mostly transparent.

..

.. bpo: 36390
.. date: 2019-03-21-08-35-00
.. nonce: OdDCGk
.. section: IDLE

Gather Format menu functions into format.py.  Combine paragraph.py,
rstrip.py, and format methods from editor.py.

..

.. bpo: 37803
.. date: 2019-09-12-16-15-55
.. nonce: chEizy
.. section: Tools/Demos

pdb's ``--help`` and ``--version`` long options now work.

..

.. bpo: 37675
.. date: 2019-07-24-16-20-54
.. nonce: 951Cvf
.. section: Tools/Demos

2to3 now works when run from a zipped standard library.
