
.. bpo: 36216
.. date: 2019-03-06-09-38-40
.. nonce: 6q1m4a
.. release date: 2019-03-12
.. section: Security

Changes urlsplit() to raise ValueError when the URL contains characters that
decompose under IDNA encoding (NFKC-normalization) into characters that
affect how the URL is parsed.

..

.. bpo: 35746
.. date: 2019-01-15-18-16-05
.. nonce: nMSd0j
.. section: Security

[CVE-2019-5010] Fix a NULL pointer deref in ssl module. The cert parser did
not handle CRL distribution points with empty DP or URI correctly. A
malicious or buggy certificate can result into segfault. Vulnerability
(TALOS-2018-0758) reported by Colin Read and Nicolas Edet of Cisco.

..

.. bpo: 35121
.. date: 2018-10-31-15-39-17
.. nonce: EgHv9k
.. section: Security

Don't send cookies of domain A without Domain attribute to domain B when
domain A is a suffix match of domain B while using a cookiejar with
:class:`http.cookiejar.DefaultCookiePolicy` policy. Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35942
.. date: 2019-02-18-09-30-55
.. nonce: oLhL2v
.. section: Core and Builtins

The error message emitted when returning invalid types from ``__fspath__``
in interfaces that allow passing :class:`~os.PathLike` objects has been
improved and now it does explain the origin of the error.

..

.. bpo: 35992
.. date: 2019-02-14-12-01-44
.. nonce: nG9e2L
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``__class_getitem__()`` not being called on a class with a custom
non-subscriptable metaclass.

..

.. bpo: 35991
.. date: 2019-02-14-00-00-30
.. nonce: xlbfSk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential double free in Modules/_randommodule.c.

..

.. bpo: 35961
.. date: 2019-02-12-20-16-34
.. nonce: 7f7Sne
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in slice_richcompare(): use strong references rather than stolen
references for the two temporary internal tuples.

..

.. bpo: 31506
.. date: 2019-01-22-02-06-39
.. nonce: eJ5FpV
.. section: Core and Builtins

Clarify the errors reported when ``object.__new__`` and ``object.__init__``
receive more than one argument. Contributed by Sanyam Khurana.

..

.. bpo: 35720
.. date: 2019-01-12-23-33-04
.. nonce: LELKQx
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a minor memory leak in pymain_parse_cmdline_impl function in
Modules/main.c

..

.. bpo: 35623
.. date: 2018-12-31-02-37-20
.. nonce: 24AQhY
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when sorting very long lists. Patch by Stephan Hohe.

..

.. bpo: 35214
.. date: 2018-12-30-15-36-23
.. nonce: GWDQcv
.. section: Core and Builtins

clang Memory Sanitizer build instrumentation was added to work around false
positives from posix, socket, time, test_io, and test_faulthandler.

..

.. bpo: 35560
.. date: 2018-12-22-22-19-51
.. nonce: 9vMWSP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an assertion error in :func:`format` in debug build for floating point
formatting with "n" format, zero padding and small width. Release build is
not impacted. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35552
.. date: 2018-12-21-13-29-30
.. nonce: 1DzQQc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Format characters ``%s`` and ``%V`` in :c:func:`PyUnicode_FromFormat` and
``%s`` in :c:func:`PyBytes_FromFormat` no longer read memory past the limit
if *precision* is specified.

..

.. bpo: 35504
.. date: 2018-12-15-14-01-45
.. nonce: JtKczP
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfaults and :exc:`SystemError`\ s when deleting certain attributes.
Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 33989
.. date: 2018-08-08-20-52-55
.. nonce: TkLBui
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible crash in :meth:`list.sort` when sorting objects with
``ob_type->tp_richcompare == NULL``.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 35931
.. date: 2019-03-11-22-06-36
.. nonce: Qp_Tbe
.. section: Library

The :mod:`pdb` ``debug`` command now gracefully handles all exceptions.

..

.. bpo: 36251
.. date: 2019-03-09-18-01-24
.. nonce: zOp9l0
.. section: Library

Fix format strings used for stderrprinter and re.Match reprs. Patch by
Stephan Hohe.

..

.. bpo: 35807
.. date: 2019-03-06-13-21-33
.. nonce: W7mmu3
.. section: Library

Update ensurepip to install pip 19.0.3 and setuptools 40.8.0.

..

.. bpo: 36179
.. date: 2019-03-04-10-42-46
.. nonce: jEyuI-
.. section: Library

Fix two unlikely reference leaks in _hashopenssl. The leaks only occur in
out-of-memory cases.

..

.. bpo: 35178
.. date: 2019-02-25-23-04-00
.. nonce: NA_rXa
.. section: Library

Ensure custom :func:`warnings.formatwarning` function can receive `line` as
positional argument. Based on patch by Tashrif Billah.

..

.. bpo: 36106
.. date: 2019-02-25-13-21-43
.. nonce: VuhEiQ
.. section: Library

Resolve potential name clash with libm's sinpi(). Patch by Dmitrii
Pasechnik.

..

.. bpo: 35512
.. date: 2019-02-24-00-04-10
.. nonce: eWDjCJ
.. section: Library

:func:`unittest.mock.patch.dict` used as a decorator with string target
resolves the target during function call instead of during decorator
construction. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 36091
.. date: 2019-02-23-06-49-06
.. nonce: 26o4Lc
.. section: Library

Clean up reference to async generator in Lib/types. Patch by Henry Chen.

..

.. bpo: 35899
.. date: 2019-02-16-07-11-02
.. nonce: cjfn5a
.. section: Library

Enum has been fixed to correctly handle empty strings and strings with
non-Latin characters (ie. 'α', 'א') without crashing. Original patch
contributed by Maxwell. Assisted by Stéphane Wirtel.

..

.. bpo: 35918
.. date: 2019-02-11-16-23-10
.. nonce: oGDlpT
.. section: Library

Removed broken ``has_key`` method from
multiprocessing.managers.SyncManager.dict. Contributed by Rémi Lapeyre.

..

.. bpo: 35960
.. date: 2019-02-10-20-57-12
.. nonce: bh-6Ja
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`dataclasses.field` throwing away empty mapping objects passed as
metadata.

..

.. bpo: 35847
.. date: 2019-01-29-09-11-09
.. nonce: eiSi4t
.. section: Library

RISC-V needed the CTYPES_PASS_BY_REF_HACK.  Fixes ctypes Structure
test_pass_by_value.

..

.. bpo: 35780
.. date: 2019-01-19-17-01-43
.. nonce: CLf7fT
.. section: Library

Fix lru_cache() errors arising in recursive, reentrant, or multi-threaded
code. These errors could result in orphan links and in the cache being
trapped in a state with fewer than the specified maximum number of links.
Fix handling of negative maxsize which should have been treated as zero. Fix
errors in toggling the "full" status flag. Fix misordering of links when
errors are encountered.  Sync-up the C code and pure Python code for the
space saving path in functions with a single positional argument. In this
common case, the space overhead of an lru cache entry is reduced by almost
half.  Fix counting of cache misses. In error cases, the miss count was out
of sync with the actual number of times the underlying user function was
called.

..

.. bpo: 23846
.. date: 2019-01-15-13-31-30
.. nonce: LT_qL8
.. section: Library

:class:`asyncio.ProactorEventLoop` now catches and logs send errors when the
self-pipe is full.

..

.. bpo: 34323
.. date: 2019-01-14-17-34-36
.. nonce: CRErrt
.. section: Library

:mod:`asyncio`: Enhance ``IocpProactor.close()`` log: wait 1 second before
the first log, then log every second. Log also the number of seconds since
``close()`` was called.

..

.. bpo: 34294
.. date: 2019-01-14-11-53-10
.. nonce: 3JFdg2
.. section: Library

re module, fix wrong capturing groups in rare cases. :func:`re.search`,
:func:`re.findall`, :func:`re.sub` and other functions that scan through
string looking for a match, should reset capturing groups between two match
attempts. Patch by Ma Lin.

..

.. bpo: 35717
.. date: 2019-01-11-17-56-15
.. nonce: 6TDTB_
.. section: Library

Fix KeyError exception raised when using enums and compile. Patch
contributed by Rémi Lapeyre.

..

.. bpo: 35699
.. date: 2019-01-11-07-09-25
.. nonce: VDiENF
.. section: Library

Fixed detection of Visual Studio Build Tools 2017 in distutils

..

.. bpo: 32710
.. date: 2019-01-10-15-55-10
.. nonce: KwECPu
.. section: Library

Fix memory leaks in asyncio ProactorEventLoop on overlapped operation
failure.

..

.. bpo: 32710
.. date: 2019-01-08-14-00-52
.. nonce: Sn5Ujj
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in asyncio in the ProactorEventLoop when ``ReadFile()`` or
``WSASend()`` overlapped operation fail immediately: release the internal
buffer.

..

.. bpo: 35682
.. date: 2019-01-08-01-54-02
.. nonce: KDM9lk
.. section: Library

Fix ``asyncio.ProactorEventLoop.sendfile()``: don't attempt to set the
result of an internal future if it's already done.

..

.. bpo: 35283
.. date: 2019-01-07-17-17-16
.. nonce: WClosC
.. section: Library

Add a pending deprecated warning for the :meth:`threading.Thread.isAlive`
method. Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 35643
.. date: 2019-01-02-20-04-49
.. nonce: DaMiaV
.. section: Library

Fixed a SyntaxWarning: invalid escape sequence in Modules/_sha3/cleanup.py.
Patch by Mickaël Schoentgen.

..

.. bpo: 35615
.. date: 2018-12-30-20-00-05
.. nonce: Uz1SVh
.. section: Library

:mod:`weakref`: Fix a RuntimeError when copying a WeakKeyDictionary or a
WeakValueDictionary, due to some keys or values disappearing while
iterating.

..

.. bpo: 28503
.. date: 2018-12-30-14-56-33
.. nonce: V4kNN3
.. section: Library

The `crypt` module now internally uses the `crypt_r()` library function
instead of `crypt()` when available.

..

.. bpo: 35121
.. date: 2018-12-30-14-35-19
.. nonce: oWmiGU
.. section: Library

Don't set cookie for a request when the request path is a prefix match of
the cookie's path attribute but doesn't end with "/". Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35585
.. date: 2018-12-26-02-28-00
.. nonce: Lkzd3Z
.. section: Library

Speed-up building enums by value, e.g. http.HTTPStatus(200).

..

.. bpo: 21478
.. date: 2018-12-21-09-54-30
.. nonce: 5gsXtc
.. section: Library

Calls to a child function created with :func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec`
should propagate to the parent. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 35513
.. date: 2018-12-16-23-28-49
.. nonce: pn-Zh3
.. section: Library

:class:`~unittest.runner.TextTestRunner` of :mod:`unittest.runner` now uses
:func:`time.perf_counter` rather than :func:`time.time` to measure the
execution time of a test: :func:`time.time` can go backwards, whereas
:func:`time.perf_counter` is monotonic.

..

.. bpo: 35502
.. date: 2018-12-14-23-56-48
.. nonce: gLHuFS
.. section: Library

Fixed reference leaks in :class:`xml.etree.ElementTree.TreeBuilder` in case
of unfinished building of the tree (in particular when an error was raised
during parsing XML).

..

.. bpo: 31446
.. date: 2018-12-12-22-52-34
.. nonce: l--Fjz
.. section: Library

Copy command line that was passed to CreateProcessW since this function can
change the content of the input buffer.

..

.. bpo: 20239
.. date: 2018-12-09-21-35-49
.. nonce: V4mWBL
.. section: Library

Allow repeated assignment deletion of :class:`unittest.mock.Mock`
attributes. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 17185
.. date: 2018-12-09-17-04-15
.. nonce: SfSCJF
.. section: Library

Set ``__signature__`` on mock for :mod:`inspect` to get signature. Patch by
Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 10496
.. date: 2018-12-05-17-42-49
.. nonce: laV_IE
.. section: Library

:func:`~distutils.utils.check_environ` of :mod:`distutils.utils` now catches
:exc:`KeyError` on calling :func:`pwd.getpwuid`: don't create the ``HOME``
environment variable in this case.

..

.. bpo: 35066
.. date: 2018-11-29-09-38-40
.. nonce: Nwej2s
.. section: Library

Previously, calling the strftime() method on a datetime object with a
trailing '%' in the format string would result in an exception. However,
this only occured when the datetime C module was being used; the python
implementation did not match this behavior. Datetime is now PEP-399
compliant, and will not throw an exception on a trailing '%'.

..

.. bpo: 24746
.. date: 2018-11-22-15-22-56
.. nonce: eSLKBE
.. section: Library

Avoid stripping trailing whitespace in doctest fancy diff. Orignial patch by
R. David Murray & Jairo Trad. Enhanced by Sanyam Khurana.

..

.. bpo: 35198
.. date: 2018-11-09-12-45-28
.. nonce: EJ8keW
.. section: Library

Fix C++ extension compilation on AIX

..

.. bpo: 28441
.. date: 2018-10-04-15-53-14
.. nonce: 2sQENe
.. section: Library

On Cygwin and MinGW, ensure that ``sys.executable`` always includes the full
filename in the path, including the ``.exe`` suffix (unless it is a symbolic
link).

..

.. bpo: 34572
.. date: 2018-09-05-03-02-32
.. nonce: ayisd2
.. section: Library

Fix C implementation of pickle.loads to use importlib's locking mechanisms,
and thereby avoid using partially-loaded modules. Patch by Tim Burgess.

..

.. bpo: 33687
.. date: 2018-06-10-14-08-52
.. nonce: 1zZdnA
.. section: Library

Fix the call to ``os.chmod()`` for ``uu.decode()`` if a mode is given or
decoded. Patch by Timo Furrer.

..

.. bpo: 32146
.. date: 2018-02-25-10-17-23
.. nonce: xOzUFW
.. section: Library

Document the interaction between frozen executables and the spawn and
forkserver start methods in multiprocessing.

..

.. bpo: 36083
.. date: 2019-02-24-12-40-13
.. nonce: JX7zbv
.. section: Documentation

Fix formatting of --check-hash-based-pycs options in the manpage Synopsis.

..

.. bpo: 34764
.. date: 2018-12-23-23-52-31
.. nonce: DwOGeT
.. section: Documentation

Improve example of iter() with 2nd sentinel argument.

..

.. bpo: 21314
.. date: 2018-11-21-23-01-37
.. nonce: PG33VT
.. section: Documentation

A new entry was added to the Core Language Section of the Programming FAQ,
which explaines the usage of slash(/) in the signature of a function. Patch
by Lysandros Nikolaou

..

.. bpo: 22062
.. date: 2018-07-28-12-41-01
.. nonce: TaN2hn
.. section: Documentation

Update documentation and docstrings for pathlib. Original patch by Mike
Short.

..

.. bpo: 36234
.. date: 2019-03-08-12-53-37
.. nonce: NRVK6W
.. section: Tests

test_posix.PosixUidGidTests: add tests for invalid uid/gid type (str).
Initial patch written by David Malcolm.

..

.. bpo: 29571
.. date: 2019-03-05-13-48-39
.. nonce: ecGuKR
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_re.test_locale_flag()``:  use ``locale.getpreferredencoding()``
rather than ``locale.getlocale()`` to get the locale encoding. With some
locales, ``locale.getlocale()`` returns the wrong encoding. On Windows, set
temporarily the ``LC_CTYPE`` locale to the user preferred encoding to ensure
that it uses the ANSI code page, to be consistent with
``locale.getpreferredencoding()``.

..

.. bpo: 36123
.. date: 2019-02-26-12-51-35
.. nonce: QRhhRS
.. section: Tests

Fix race condition in test_socket.

..

.. bpo: 27313
.. date: 2019-02-24-01-58-38
.. nonce: Sj9veH
.. section: Tests

Avoid test_ttk_guionly ComboboxTest failure with macOS Cocoa Tk.

..

.. bpo: 36019
.. date: 2019-02-21-14-23-51
.. nonce: zS_OUi
.. section: Tests

Add test.support.TEST_HTTP_URL and replace references of
http://www.example.com by this new constant. Contributed by Stéphane Wirtel.

..

.. bpo: 36037
.. date: 2019-02-19-15-21-14
.. nonce: 75wG9_
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ssl for strict OpenSSL configuration like RHEL8 strict crypto
policy. Use older TLS version for minimum TLS version of the server SSL
context if needed, to test TLS version older than default minimum TLS
version.

..

.. bpo: 35505
.. date: 2019-02-12-01-33-08
.. nonce: N9ba_K
.. section: Tests

Make test_imap4_host_default_value independent on whether the local IMAP
server is running.

..

.. bpo: 35917
.. date: 2019-02-06-18-06-16
.. nonce: -Clv1L
.. section: Tests

multiprocessing: provide unit tests for SyncManager and SharedMemoryManager
classes + all the shareable types which are supposed to be supported by
them.  (patch by Giampaolo Rodola)

..

.. bpo: 35772
.. date: 2019-01-18-12-19-19
.. nonce: sGBbsn
.. section: Tests

Fix sparse file tests of test_tarfile on ppc64 with the tmpfs filesystem.
Fix the function testing if the filesystem supports sparse files: create a
file which contains data and "holes", instead of creating a file which
contains no data. tmpfs effective block size is a page size (tmpfs lives in
the page cache). RHEL uses 64 KiB pages on aarch64, ppc64, ppc64le, only
s390x and x86_64 use 4 KiB pages, whereas the test punch holes of 4 KiB.

..

.. bpo: 35045
.. date: 2019-01-10-18-35-42
.. nonce: qdd6d9
.. section: Tests

Make ssl tests less strict and also accept TLSv1 as system default. The
changes unbreaks test_min_max_version on Fedora 29.

..

.. bpo: 31731
.. date: 2018-12-18-23-20-39
.. nonce: tcv85C
.. section: Tests

Fix a race condition in ``check_interrupted_write()`` of test_io: create
directly the thread with SIGALRM signal blocked, rather than blocking the
signal later from the thread. Previously, it was possible that the thread
gets the signal before the signal is blocked.

..

.. bpo: 35424
.. date: 2018-12-18-22-36-53
.. nonce: 1Pz4IS
.. section: Tests

Fix test_multiprocessing_main_handling: use :class:`multiprocessing.Pool`
with a context manager and then explicitly join the pool.

..

.. bpo: 35519
.. date: 2018-12-17-16-41-45
.. nonce: RR3L_w
.. section: Tests

Rename :mod:`test.bisect` module to :mod:`test.bisect_cmd` to avoid conflict
with :mod:`bisect` module when running directly a test like ``./python
Lib/test/test_xmlrpc.py``.

..

.. bpo: 35513
.. date: 2018-12-16-23-36-47
.. nonce: k4WHlA
.. section: Tests

Replace :func:`time.time` with :func:`time.monotonic` in tests to measure
time delta.

..

.. bpo: 34279
.. date: 2018-12-12-18-20-18
.. nonce: DhKcuP
.. section: Tests

:func:`test.support.run_unittest` no longer raise :exc:`TestDidNotRun` if
the test result contains skipped tests. The exception is now only raised if
no test have been run and no test have been skipped.

..

.. bpo: 35412
.. date: 2018-12-12-18-07-58
.. nonce: kbuJor
.. section: Tests

Add testcase to ``test_future4``: check unicode literal.

..

.. bpo: 26704
.. date: 2018-12-10-13-18-37
.. nonce: DBAN4c
.. section: Tests

Added test demonstrating double-patching of an instance method.  Patch by
Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 34691
.. date: 2019-02-02-13-34-05
.. nonce: B-Lsj4
.. section: Build

The _contextvars module is now built into the core Python library on
Windows.

..

.. bpo: 35683
.. date: 2019-01-10-11-37-18
.. nonce: pf5Oos
.. section: Build

Improved Azure Pipelines build steps and now verifying layouts correctly

..

.. bpo: 35642
.. date: 2019-01-02-11-23-33
.. nonce: pjkhJe
.. section: Build

Remove asynciomodule.c from pythoncore.vcxproj

..

.. bpo: 35550
.. date: 2018-12-29-10-19-43
.. nonce: BTuu8e
.. section: Build

Fix incorrect Solaris #ifdef checks to look for __sun && __SVR4 instead of
sun when compiling.

..

.. bpo: 24643
.. date: 2019-02-24-07-52-39
.. nonce: PofyiS
.. section: Windows

Fix name collisions due to ``#define timezone _timezone`` in PC/pyconfig.h.

..

.. bpo: 35692
.. date: 2019-02-02-16-23-57
.. nonce: cIiiE9
.. section: Windows

``pathlib`` no longer raises when checking file and directory existence on
drives that are not ready

..

.. bpo: 35872
.. date: 2019-02-02-15-57-19
.. nonce: Bba2n7
.. section: Windows

Uses the base Python executable when invoking venv in a virtual environment

..

.. bpo: 35873
.. date: 2019-02-02-15-56-50
.. nonce: UW-qS9
.. section: Windows

Prevents venv paths being inherited by child processes

..

.. bpo: 35299
.. date: 2019-02-02-14-47-12
.. nonce: 1rgEzd
.. section: Windows

Fix sysconfig detection of the source directory and distutils handling of
pyconfig.h during PGO profiling

..

.. bpo: 32560
.. date: 2019-02-02-11-02-44
.. nonce: I5WAGW
.. section: Windows

The ``py`` launcher now forwards its ``STARTUPINFO`` structure to child
processes.

..

.. bpo: 35854
.. date: 2019-01-29-15-44-46
.. nonce: Ww3z19
.. section: Windows

Fix EnvBuilder and --symlinks in venv on Windows

..

.. bpo: 35811
.. date: 2019-01-25-12-46-36
.. nonce: 2hU-mm
.. section: Windows

Avoid propagating venv settings when launching via py.exe

..

.. bpo: 35797
.. date: 2019-01-25-12-29-14
.. nonce: MzyOK9
.. section: Windows

Fix default executable used by the multiprocessing module

..

.. bpo: 29734
.. date: 2019-01-12-16-52-38
.. nonce: 6_OJwI
.. section: Windows

Fix handle leaks in os.stat on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 35596
.. date: 2019-01-08-13-56-01
.. nonce: oFvhcm
.. section: Windows

Use unchecked PYCs for the embeddable distro to avoid zipimport
restrictions.

..

.. bpo: 35596
.. date: 2018-12-28-07-25-47
.. nonce: P9CEY2
.. section: Windows

Fix vcruntime140.dll being added to embeddable distro multiple times.

..

.. bpo: 35402
.. date: 2018-12-13-13-30-04
.. nonce: n_mXb2
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use Tcl and Tk 8.6.9

..

.. bpo: 33316
.. date: 2018-04-20-03-24-07
.. nonce: 9IiJ8J
.. section: Windows

PyThread_release_lock always fails

..

.. bpo: 1104
.. date: 2017-11-24-12-53-54
.. nonce: 1CWSZp
.. section: Windows

Correctly handle string length in ``msilib.SummaryInfo.GetProperty()`` to
prevent it from truncating the last character.

..

.. bpo: 36176
.. date: 2019-03-10-00-07-46
.. nonce: jk_vv6
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE autocomplete & calltip popup colors. Prevent conflicts with Linux
dark themes (and slightly darken calltip background).

..

.. bpo: 36152
.. date: 2019-02-28-18-52-40
.. nonce: 9pkHIU
.. section: IDLE

Remove colorizer.ColorDelegator.close_when_done and the corresponding
argument of .close().  In IDLE, both have always been None or False since
2007.

..

.. bpo: 32129
.. date: 2019-02-25-11-40-14
.. nonce: 4qVCzD
.. section: IDLE

Avoid blurry IDLE application icon on macOS with Tk 8.6. Patch by Kevin
Walzer.

..

.. bpo: 24310
.. date: 2019-02-23-22-31-20
.. nonce: j_vJQl
.. section: IDLE

IDLE -- Document settings dialog font tab sample.

..

.. bpo: 36096
.. date: 2019-02-23-17-53-53
.. nonce: mN5Ly3
.. section: IDLE

Refactor class variables to instance variables in colorizer.

..

.. bpo: 35833
.. date: 2019-02-08-22-14-24
.. nonce: XKFRvF
.. section: IDLE

Revise IDLE doc for control codes sent to Shell. Add a code example block.

..

.. bpo: 35770
.. date: 2019-01-18-13-04-30
.. nonce: 2LxJGu
.. section: IDLE

IDLE macosx deletes Options => Configure IDLE. It previously deleted Window
=> Zoom Height by mistake. (Zoom Height is now on the Options menu).  On
Mac, the settings dialog is accessed via Preferences on the IDLE menu.

..

.. bpo: 35769
.. date: 2019-01-18-01-24-23
.. nonce: GqsB34
.. section: IDLE

Change IDLE's new file name from 'Untitled' to 'untitled'

..

.. bpo: 35689
.. date: 2019-01-08-17-51-44
.. nonce: LlaqR8
.. section: IDLE

Add docstrings and unittests for colorizer.py.

..

.. bpo: 35660
.. date: 2019-01-04-19-14-29
.. nonce: hMxI7N
.. section: IDLE

Fix imports in idlelib.window.

..

.. bpo: 35641
.. date: 2019-01-02-22-15-01
.. nonce: QEaANl
.. section: IDLE

Proper format `calltip` when the function has no docstring.

..

.. bpo: 33987
.. date: 2018-12-31-17-04-18
.. nonce: fD92up
.. section: IDLE

Use ttk Frame for ttk widgets.

..

.. bpo: 34055
.. date: 2018-12-28-17-16-33
.. nonce: TmmpzR
.. section: IDLE

Fix erroneous 'smart' indents and newlines in IDLE Shell.

..

.. bpo: 35591
.. date: 2018-12-28-01-19-20
.. nonce: SFpDj2
.. section: IDLE

Find Selection now works when selection not found.

..

.. bpo: 35196
.. date: 2018-12-27-17-46-42
.. nonce: 9E-xUh
.. section: IDLE

Speed up squeezer line counting.

..

.. bpo: 35598
.. date: 2018-12-27-15-29-11
.. nonce: FWOOm8
.. section: IDLE

Update config_key: use PEP 8 names and ttk widgets, make some objects
global, and add tests.

..

.. bpo: 28097
.. date: 2018-12-26-13-53-34
.. nonce: 95I9NT
.. section: IDLE

Add Previous/Next History entries to Shell menu.

..

.. bpo: 35208
.. date: 2018-12-23-17-42-11
.. nonce: J5NOg7
.. section: IDLE

Squeezer now properly counts wrapped lines before newlines.

..

.. bpo: 35555
.. date: 2018-12-21-18-44-30
.. nonce: M58_K3
.. section: IDLE

Gray out Code Context menu entry when it's not applicable.

..

.. bpo: 35521
.. date: 2018-12-20-00-14-15
.. nonce: x32BRn
.. section: IDLE

Document the IDLE editor code context feature. Add some internal references
within the IDLE doc.

..

.. bpo: 22703
.. date: 2018-12-18-13-56-31
.. nonce: UlsjKQ
.. section: IDLE

The Code Context menu label now toggles between Show/Hide Code Context. The
Zoom Height menu now toggles between Zoom/Restore Height. Zoom Height has
moved from the Window menu to the Options menu.

..

.. bpo: 35132
.. date: 2019-03-04-02-09-09
.. nonce: 1R_pnL
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix py-list and py-bt commands of python-gdb.py on gdb7.

..

.. bpo: 33817
.. date: 2019-01-11-11-16-16
.. nonce: nJ4yIj
.. section: C API

Fixed :c:func:`_PyBytes_Resize` for empty bytes objects.
