.. bpo: 34879
.. date: 2018-10-02-22-55-11
.. nonce: 7VNH2a
.. release date: 2018-10-13
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible null pointer dereference in bytesobject.c.  Patch by Zackery
Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 34854
.. date: 2018-09-30-19-27-13
.. nonce: 6TKTcB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in compiling string annotations containing a lambda with a
keyword-only argument that doesn't have a default value.

..

.. bpo: 34320
.. date: 2018-08-02-22-34-59
.. nonce: hNshAA
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``dict(od)`` didn't copy iteration order of OrderedDict.

..

.. bpo: 34769
.. date: 2018-10-09-11-01-16
.. nonce: cSkkZt
.. section: Library

Fix for async generators not finalizing when event loop is in debug mode and
garbage collector runs in another thread.

..

.. bpo: 34922
.. date: 2018-10-07-21-18-52
.. nonce: 37IdsA
.. section: Library

Fixed integer overflow in the :meth:`~hashlib.shake.digest()` and
:meth:`~hashlib.shake.hexdigest()` methods for the SHAKE algorithm in the
:mod:`hashlib` module.

..

.. bpo: 34909
.. date: 2018-10-20-00-35-19
.. nonce: Ew_8DC
.. section: Library

Enum: fix grandchildren subclassing when parent mixed with concrete data
types.

..
.. bpo: 34900
.. date: 2018-10-05-05-55-53
.. nonce: 8RNiFu
.. section: Library

Fixed :meth:`unittest.TestCase.debug` when used to call test methods with
subtests.  Patch by Bruno Oliveira.

..

.. bpo: 34871
.. date: 2018-10-04-18-46-54
.. nonce: t3X-dB
.. section: Library

Fix inspect module polluted ``sys.modules`` when parsing
``__text_signature__`` of callable.

..

.. bpo: 34872
.. date: 2018-10-02-19-36-34
.. nonce: yWZRhI
.. section: Library

Fix self-cancellation in C implementation of asyncio.Task

..

.. bpo: 34819
.. date: 2018-09-27-09-45-00
.. nonce: 9ZaFyO
.. section: Library

Use a monotonic clock to compute timeouts in :meth:`Executor.map` and
:func:`as_completed`, in order to prevent timeouts from deviating when the
system clock is adjusted.

..

.. bpo: 34521
.. date: 2018-10-13-19-15-23
.. nonce: YPaiTK
.. section: Library

Use :func:`socket.CMSG_SPACE` to calculate ancillary data size instead of
:func:`socket.CMSG_LEN` in :func:`multiprocessing.reduction.recvfds` as
:rfc:`3542` requires the use of the former for portable applications.

..

.. bpo: 34334
.. date: 2018-09-25-08-42-34
.. nonce: rSPBW9
.. section: Library

In :class:`QueueHandler`, clear `exc_text` from :class:`LogRecord` to
prevent traceback from being written twice.

..

.. bpo: 6721
.. date: 2018-09-13-10-09-19
.. nonce: ZUL_F3
.. section: Library

Acquire the logging module's commonly used internal locks while fork()ing to
avoid deadlocks in the child process.

..

.. bpo: 34172
.. date: 2018-07-26-10-31-52
.. nonce: 8ovLNi
.. section: Library

Fix a reference issue inside multiprocessing.Pool that caused the pool to
remain alive if it was deleted without being closed or terminated
explicitly.

..

.. bpo: 32174
.. date: 2018-10-08-19-15-28
.. nonce: YO9CYm
.. section: Documentation

chm document displays non-ASCII charaters properly on some MBCS Windows
systems.

..

.. bpo: 32962
.. date: 2018-05-10-16-59-15
.. nonce: S-rcIN
.. section: Tests

Fixed test_gdb when Python is compiled with flags -mcet -fcf-protection -O0.

..

.. bpo: 34370
.. date: 2018-10-12-22-43-02
.. nonce: kTJas4
.. section: macOS

Revert to using the released Tk 8.6.8 with macOS installers instead of the
Tk 8.6.x development snapshot used with 3.7.1rc1 and 3.6.7rc1. The snapshot
introduced at least one significant regression (bpo-34927).

..

.. bpo: 34910
.. date: 2018-10-05-17-06-49
.. nonce: tSFrls
.. section: C API

Ensure that :c:func:`PyObject_Print` always returns ``-1`` on error.  Patch
by Zackery Spytz.
