.. date: 2023-06-01-03-24-58
.. gh-issue: 103142
.. nonce: GLWDMX
.. release date: 2023-06-06
.. section: Security

The version of OpenSSL used in our binary builds has been upgraded to 1.1.1u
to address several CVEs.

..

.. date: 2023-05-02-17-56-32
.. gh-issue: 99889
.. nonce: l664SU
.. section: Security

Fixed a security in flaw in :func:`uu.decode` that could allow for directory
traversal based on the input if no ``out_file`` was specified.

..

.. date: 2023-05-01-15-03-25
.. gh-issue: 104049
.. nonce: b01Y3g
.. section: Security

Do not expose the local on-disk location in directory indexes produced by
:class:`http.client.SimpleHTTPRequestHandler`.

..

.. date: 2023-03-07-20-59-17
.. gh-issue: 102153
.. nonce: 14CLSZ
.. section: Security

:func:`urllib.parse.urlsplit` now strips leading C0 control and space
characters following the specification for URLs defined by WHATWG in
response to CVE-2023-24329. Patch by Illia Volochii.

..

.. date: 2023-02-08-22-03-04
.. gh-issue: 101727
.. nonce: 9P5eZz
.. section: Security

Updated the OpenSSL version used in Windows and macOS binary release builds
to 1.1.1t to address CVE-2023-0286, CVE-2022-4303, and CVE-2022-4303 per
`the OpenSSL 2023-02-07 security advisory
<https://www.openssl.org/news/secadv/20230207.txt>`_.

..

.. date: 2023-01-24-16-12-00
.. gh-issue: 101283
.. nonce: 9tqu39
.. section: Security

:class:`subprocess.Popen` now uses a safer approach to find ``cmd.exe`` when
launching with ``shell=True``. Patch by Eryk Sun, based on a patch by Oleg
Iarygin.

..

.. date: 2023-04-27-20-03-08
.. gh-issue: 103935
.. nonce: Uaf2M0
.. section: Library

Use :func:`io.open_code` for files to be executed instead of raw
:func:`open`

..

.. date: 2023-03-23-15-24-38
.. gh-issue: 102953
.. nonce: YR4KaK
.. section: Library

The extraction methods in :mod:`tarfile`, and :func:`shutil.unpack_archive`,
have a new a *filter* argument that allows limiting tar features than may be
surprising or dangerous, such as creating files outside the destination
directory. See :ref:`tarfile-extraction-filter` for details.

..

.. date: 2023-02-17-18-44-27
.. gh-issue: 101997
.. nonce: A6_blD
.. section: Library

Upgrade pip wheel bundled with ensurepip (pip 23.0.1)

..

.. date: 2023-02-27-18-55-32
.. gh-issue: 102306
.. nonce: bkokFL
.. section: Build

[3.8] Avoid GHA CI macOS test_posix failure by using the appropriate macOS
SDK.

..

.. date: 2023-01-09-23-03-57
.. gh-issue: 100180
.. nonce: b5phrg
.. section: Windows

Update Windows installer to OpenSSL 1.1.1s

..

.. date: 2023-05-30-23-30-46
.. gh-issue: 103142
.. nonce: 55lMXQ
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use OpenSSL 1.1.1u.
