.. bpo: 39080
.. date: 2019-12-17-21-45-36
.. nonce: OrxEVS
.. release date: 2019-12-18
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix the value of *end_col_offset* for Starred Expression AST nodes when they
are among the elements in the *args* attribute of Call AST nodes.

..

.. bpo: 39031
.. date: 2019-12-12-21-05-43
.. nonce: imlCYZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

When parsing an "elif" node, lineno and col_offset of the node now point to
the "elif" keyword and not to its condition, making it consistent with the
"if" node. Patch by Lysandros Nikolaou.

..

.. bpo: 39008
.. date: 2019-12-09-10-38-51
.. nonce: Rrp6f1
.. section: Core and Builtins

:c:func:`PySys_Audit` now requires ``Py_ssize_t`` to be used for size
arguments in the format string, regardless of whether ``PY_SSIZE_T_CLEAN``
was defined at include time.

..

.. bpo: 39022
.. date: 2019-12-10-23-34-48
.. nonce: QDtIxI
.. section: Library

Update importlib.metadata to include improvements from importlib_metadata
1.3 including better serialization of EntryPoints and improved documentation
for custom finders.

..

.. bpo: 38811
.. date: 2019-11-15-18-06-04
.. nonce: AmdQ6M
.. section: Library

Fix an unhandled exception in :mod:`pathlib` when :meth:`os.link` is
missing. Patch by Toke Høiland-Jørgensen.

..

.. bpo: 36406
.. date: 2019-03-24-12-12-27
.. nonce: mCEkOl
.. section: Library

Handle namespace packages in :mod:`doctest`. Patch by Karthikeyan
Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 38546
.. date: 2019-12-17-15-27-07
.. nonce: 82JwN2
.. section: Tests

Multiprocessing and concurrent.futures tests now stop the resource tracker
process when tests complete.

..

.. bpo: 39007
.. date: 2019-12-09-10-40-34
.. nonce: vtarxo
.. section: Windows

Add auditing events to functions in :mod:`winreg`.

..

.. bpo: 38295
.. date: 2019-12-17-03-43-04
.. nonce: hgDvlB
.. section: macOS

Prevent failure of test_relative_path in test_py_compile on macOS Catalina.

..

.. bpo: 38944
.. date: 2019-11-30-12-10-36
.. nonce: _3xjKG
.. section: IDLE

Escape key now closes IDLE completion windows.  Patch by Johnny Najera.

..

.. bpo: 38943
.. date: 2019-11-29-23-44-11
.. nonce: 8pUKKs
.. section: IDLE

Fix IDLE autocomplete windows not always appearing on some systems. Patch by
Johnny Najera.
