.. bpo: 39184
.. date: 2020-02-07-23-54-18
.. nonce: v-ue-v
.. release date: 2020-02-17
.. section: Security

Add audit events to functions in `fcntl`, `msvcrt`, `os`, `resource`,
`shutil`, `signal` and `syslog`.

..

.. bpo: 39619
.. date: 2020-02-13-07-35-00
.. nonce: inb_master_chroot
.. section: Core and Builtins

Enable use of :func:`os.chroot` on HP-UX systems.

..

.. bpo: 39606
.. date: 2020-02-11-23-59-07
.. nonce: a72Sxc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix regression caused by fix for bpo-39386, that prevented calling
``aclose`` on an async generator that had already been closed or exhausted.

..

.. bpo: 39453
.. date: 2020-01-25-23-51-17
.. nonce: xCOkYk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a possible crash in :meth:`list.__contains__` when a list is changed
during comparing items. Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 39219
.. date: 2020-01-05-13-36-08
.. nonce: uHtKd4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Syntax errors raised in the tokenizer now always set correct "text" and
"offset" attributes.

..

.. bpo: 27657
.. date: 2020-02-16-07-08-54
.. nonce: 9atgcz
.. section: Library

The original fix for bpo-27657, "Fix urlparse() with numeric paths"
(GH-16839) included in 3.8.1, inadvertently introduced a behavior change
that broke several third-party packages relying on the original undefined
parsing behavior. The change is reverted in 3.8.2, restoring the behavior of
3.8.0 and earlier releases.

..

.. bpo: 39474
.. date: 2020-02-12-12-01-26
.. nonce: RZMEUH
.. section: Library

Fixed starting position of AST for expressions like ``(a)(b)``, ``(a)[b]``
and ``(a).b``.

..

.. bpo: 21016
.. date: 2020-02-12-10-04-39
.. nonce: bFXPH7
.. section: Library

The :mod:`pydoc` and :mod:`trace` modules now use the :mod:`sysconfig`
module to get the path to the Python standard library, to support uncommon
installation path like ``/usr/lib64/python3.9/`` on Fedora. Patch by Jan
Matějek.

..

.. bpo: 39595
.. date: 2020-02-07-23-14-14
.. nonce: DHwddE
.. section: Library

Improved performance of zipfile.Path for files with a large number of
entries. Also improved performance and fixed minor issue as published with
`importlib_metadata 1.5
<https://importlib-metadata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/changelog%20(links).html#v1-5-0>`_.

..

.. bpo: 39600
.. date: 2020-02-10-17-09-48
.. nonce: X6NsyM
.. section: IDLE

In the font configuration window, remove duplicated font names.
