.. bpo: 41525
.. date: 2020-08-12-07-35-07
.. nonce: d9q3XL
.. release date: 2020-09-23
.. section: Core and Builtins

The output of ``python --help`` contains now only ASCII characters.

..

.. bpo: 41817
.. date: 2020-09-22-00-23-30
.. nonce: bnh-VG
.. section: Library

fix `tkinter.EventType` Enum so all members are strings, and none are tuples

..

.. bpo: 41815
.. date: 2020-09-19-23-14-54
.. nonce: RNpuX3
.. section: Library

Fix SQLite3 segfault when backing up closed database. Patch contributed by
Peter David McCormick.

..

.. bpo: 41517
.. date: 2020-09-15-22-43-30
.. nonce: sLBH7g
.. section: Library

fix bug allowing Enums to be extended via multiple inheritance

..

.. bpo: 39587
.. date: 2020-09-15-14-56-13
.. nonce: 69xzuh
.. section: Library

use the correct mix-in data type when constructing Enums

..

.. bpo: 41789
.. date: 2020-09-14-19-27-46
.. nonce: pI_uZQ
.. section: Library

Honor `object` overrides in `Enum` class creation (specifically, `__str__`,
`__repr__`, `__format__`, and `__reduce_ex__`).

..

.. bpo: 39651
.. date: 2020-09-11-12-38-55
.. nonce: JMp9l2
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in the ``call_soon_threadsafe()`` method of
``asyncio.ProactorEventLoop``: do nothing if the self-pipe socket has been
closed.

..

.. bpo: 41720
.. date: 2020-09-04-20-45-38
.. nonce: PW9MzZ
.. section: Library

Fixed :meth:`turtle.Vec2D.__rmul__` for arguments which are not int or
float.

..

.. bpo: 39728
.. date: 2020-02-24-10-58-34
.. nonce: kOOaHn
.. section: Library

fix default `_missing_` so a duplicate `ValueError` is not set as the
`__context__` of the original `ValueError`

..

.. bpo: 37479
.. date: 2019-07-02-12-43-57
.. nonce: O53a5S
.. section: Library

When `Enum.__str__` is overridden in a derived class, the override will be
used by `Enum.__format__` regardless of whether mixin classes are present.

..

.. bpo: 35293
.. date: 2020-09-12-17-37-13
.. nonce: _cOwPD
.. section: Documentation

Fix RemovedInSphinx40Warning when building the documentation. Patch by
Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 37149
.. date: 2020-09-10-07-48-02
.. nonce: VD0rCv
.. section: Documentation

Change Shipman tkinter doc link from archive.org to TkDocs. (The doc has
been removed from the NMT server.)  The new link responds much faster and
includes a short explanatory note.

..

.. bpo: 41731
.. date: 2020-09-11-19-12-31
.. nonce: Ivxh4U
.. section: Tests

Make test_cmd_line_script pass with option '-vv'.

..

.. bpo: 41744
.. date: 2020-09-11-17-59-33
.. nonce: e_ugDQ
.. section: Windows

Fixes automatic import of props file when using the Nuget package.

..

.. bpo: 35764
.. date: 2020-09-22-11-13-45
.. nonce: VoNa8y
.. section: IDLE

Rewrite the Calltips doc section.

..

.. bpo: 40181
.. date: 2020-09-22-00-45-40
.. nonce: hhQi3z
.. section: IDLE

In calltips, stop reminding that '/' marks the end of positional-only
arguments.
