.. bpo: 46794
.. date: 2022-02-22-12-07-53
.. nonce: 6WvJ9o
.. release date: 2022-03-15
.. section: Core and Builtins

Bump up the libexpat version into 2.4.6

..

.. bpo: 46985
.. date: 2022-03-11-13-34-16
.. nonce: BgoMr2
.. section: Library

Upgrade pip wheel bundled with ensurepip (pip 22.0.4)

..

.. bpo: 46932
.. date: 2022-03-07-20-20-34
.. nonce: xbarAs
.. section: Library

Update bundled libexpat to 2.4.7

..

.. bpo: 46811
.. date: 2022-02-20-21-03-31
.. nonce: 8BxgdQ
.. section: Library

Make test suite support Expat >=2.4.5

..

.. bpo: 46784
.. date: 2022-02-18-22-10-30
.. nonce: SVOQJx
.. section: Library

Fix libexpat symbols collisions with user dynamically loaded or statically
linked libexpat in embedded Python.

..

.. bpo: 46756
.. date: 2022-02-15-11-57-53
.. nonce: AigSPi
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :meth:`urllib.request.HTTPPasswordMgr.find_user_password` and
:meth:`urllib.request.HTTPPasswordMgrWithPriorAuth.is_authenticated` which
allowed to bypass authorization. For example, access to URI
``example.org/foobar`` was allowed if the user was authorized for URI
``example.org/foo``.

..

.. bpo: 46400
.. date: 2022-01-30-15-16-12
.. nonce: vweUiO
.. section: Library

expat: Update libexpat from 2.4.1 to 2.4.4

..

.. bpo: 46474
.. date: 2022-01-22-14-49-10
.. nonce: eKQhvx
.. section: Library

In ``importlib.metadata.EntryPoint.pattern``, avoid potential REDoS by
limiting ambiguity in consecutive whitespace.

..

.. bpo: 44849
.. date: 2021-08-06-13-00-28
.. nonce: O78F_f
.. section: Library

Fix the :func:`os.set_inheritable` function on FreeBSD 14 for file
descriptor opened with the :data:`~os.O_PATH` flag: ignore the
:data:`~errno.EBADF` error on ``ioctl()``, fallback on the ``fcntl()``
implementation. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 41028
.. date: 2020-06-18-23-37-03
.. nonce: vM8bC8
.. section: Documentation

Language and version switchers, previously maintained in every cpython
branches, are now handled by docsbuild-script.

..

.. bpo: 45195
.. date: 2021-09-14-13-16-18
.. nonce: EyQR1G
.. section: Tests

Fix test_readline.test_nonascii(): sometimes, the newline character is not
written at the end, so don't expect it in the output. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. bpo: 44949
.. date: 2021-08-18-18-30-12
.. nonce: VE5ENv
.. section: Tests

Fix auto history tests of test_readline: sometimes, the newline character is
not written at the end, so don't expect it in the output.

..

.. bpo: 47024
.. date: 2022-03-15-11-53-10
.. nonce: p3PjRy
.. section: Build

Update Windows builds and macOS installer build to use OpenSSL 1.1.1n.

..

.. bpo: 45405
.. date: 2021-10-11-16-27-38
.. nonce: iSfdW5
.. section: Build

Prevent ``internal configure error`` when running ``configure`` with recent
versions of clang.  Patch by David Bohman.

..

.. bpo: 45220
.. date: 2021-09-16-18-00-43
.. nonce: TgbkvW
.. section: Build

Avoid building with the Windows 11 SDK previews automatically. This may be
overridden by setting the ``DefaultWindowsSDKVersion`` environment variable
before building.

..

.. bpo: 44549
.. date: 2022-03-07-17-46-40
.. nonce: SPrGS9
.. section: Windows

Update bzip2 to 1.0.8 in Windows builds to mitigate CVE-2016-3189 and
CVE-2019-12900

..

.. bpo: 46948
.. date: 2022-03-07-16-34-11
.. nonce: Ufd4tG
.. section: Windows

Prevent CVE-2022-26488 by ensuring the Add to PATH option in the Windows
installer uses the correct path when being repaired.

..

.. bpo: 44828
.. date: 2021-10-25-02-02-21
.. nonce: XBdXlJ
.. section: macOS

Avoid tkinter file dialog failure on macOS 12 Monterey when using the Tk
8.6.11 provided by python.org macOS installers. Patch by Marc Culler of the
Tk project.
