.. bpo: 38469
.. date: 2019-10-13-23-41-38
.. nonce: 9kmuQj
.. release date: 2019-10-14
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug where the scope of named expressions was not being resolved
correctly in the presence of the *global* keyword. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 38379
.. date: 2019-10-09-16-50-52
.. nonce: oz5qZx
.. section: Core and Builtins

When cyclic garbage collection (gc) runs finalizers that resurrect
unreachable objects, the current gc run ends, without collecting any cyclic
trash.  However, the statistics reported by ``collect()`` and
``get_stats()`` claimed that all cyclic trash found was collected, and that
the resurrected objects were collected.   Changed the stats to report that
none were collected.

..

.. bpo: 38449
.. date: 2019-10-11-18-49-00
.. nonce: 9TWMlz
.. section: Library

Revert GH-15522, which introduces a regression in
:meth:`mimetypes.guess_type` due to improper handling of filenames as urls.

..

.. bpo: 38431
.. date: 2019-10-10-16-53-00
.. nonce: d5wzNp
.. section: Library

Fix ``__repr__`` method for :class:`dataclasses.InitVar` to support typing
objects, patch by Samuel Colvin.

..

.. bpo: 38109
.. date: 2019-10-10-00-25-28
.. nonce: 9w-IGF
.. section: Library

Add missing :data:`stat.S_IFDOOR`, :data:`stat.S_IFPORT`,
:data:`stat.S_IFWHT`, :func:`stat.S_ISDOOR`, :func:`stat.S_ISPORT`, and
:func:`stat.S_ISWHT` values to the Python implementation of :mod:`stat`.

..

.. bpo: 38405
.. date: 2019-10-08-11-18-40
.. nonce: 0-7e7s
.. section: Library

Nested subclasses of :class:`typing.NamedTuple` are now pickleable.

..

.. bpo: 38332
.. date: 2019-10-05-02-07-52
.. nonce: hwrPN7
.. section: Library

Prevent :exc:`KeyError` thrown by :func:`_encoded_words.decode` when given
an encoded-word with invalid content-type encoding from propagating all the
way to :func:`email.message.get`.

..

.. bpo: 38341
.. date: 2019-10-01-21-06-18
.. nonce: uqwgU_
.. section: Library

Add :exc:`smtplib.SMTPNotSupportedError` to the :mod:`smtplib` exported
names.

..

.. bpo: 13153
.. date: 2019-09-29-22-47-37
.. nonce: 0mO9qR
.. section: Library

OS native encoding is now used for converting between Python strings and Tcl
objects.  This allows to display, copy and paste to clipboard emoji and
other non-BMP characters.  Converting strings from Tcl to Python and back
now never fails (except MemoryError).

..

.. bpo: 38294
.. date: 2019-09-27-23-37-41
.. nonce: go_jFf
.. section: Documentation

Add list of no-longer-escaped chars to re.escape documentation.

..

.. bpo: 37531
.. date: 2019-10-08-16-42-05
.. nonce: 7v-_Ca
.. section: Tests

On timeout, regrtest no longer attempts to call ``popen.communicate()``
again: it can hang until all child processes using stdout and stderr pipes
completes. Kill the worker process and ignores its output. Change also the
faulthandler timeout of the main process from 1 minute to 5 minutes, for
Python slowest buildbots.

..

.. bpo: 38344
.. date: 2019-10-05-05-50-58
.. nonce: scr2LO
.. section: Windows

Fix error message in activate.bat.

..

.. bpo: 38359
.. date: 2019-10-03-08-04-14
.. nonce: wzwsl_
.. section: Windows

Ensures ``pyw.exe`` launcher reads correct registry key.

..

.. bpo: 38355
.. date: 2019-10-02-15-38-49
.. nonce: n3AWX6
.. section: Windows

Fixes ``ntpath.realpath`` failing on ``sys.executable``.

..

.. bpo: 36698
.. date: 2019-10-04-18-03-09
.. nonce: BKcmom
.. section: IDLE

IDLE no longer fails when write non-encodable characters to stderr.  It now
escapes them with a backslash, as the regular Python interpreter. Added the
``errors`` field to the standard streams.

..

.. bpo: 38118
.. date: 2019-10-08-15-07-52
.. nonce: pIZD6H
.. section: Tools/Demos

Update Valgrind suppression file to ignore a false alarm in
:c:func:`PyUnicode_Decode` when using GCC builtin strcmp().

..

.. bpo: 38347
.. date: 2019-10-02-09-48-42
.. nonce: 2Tq5D1
.. section: Tools/Demos

pathfix.py: Assume all files that end on '.py' are Python scripts when
working recursively.

..

.. bpo: 38395
.. date: 2019-10-08-01-23-24
.. nonce: MJ6Ey9
.. section: C API

Fix a crash in :class:`weakref.proxy` objects due to incorrect lifetime
management when calling some associated methods that may delete the last
reference to object being referenced by the proxy. Patch by Pablo Galindo.
