.. date: 2022-08-07-16-53-38
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: ch010gps
.. release date: 2022-09-06
.. section: Security

Converting between :class:`int` and :class:`str` in bases other than 2
(binary), 4, 8 (octal), 16 (hexadecimal), or 32 such as base 10 (decimal)
now raises a :exc:`ValueError` if the number of digits in string form is
above a limit to avoid potential denial of service attacks due to the
algorithmic complexity. This is a mitigation for `CVE-2020-10735
<https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2020-10735>`_.

This new limit can be configured or disabled by environment variable,
command line flag, or :mod:`sys` APIs. See the :ref:`integer string
conversion length limitation <int_max_str_digits>` documentation.  The
default limit is 4300 digits in string form.

Patch by Gregory P. Smith [Google] and Christian Heimes [Red Hat] with
feedback from Victor Stinner, Thomas Wouters, Steve Dower, Ned Deily, and
Mark Dickinson.

..

.. date: 2022-06-15-20-09-23
.. gh-issue: 87389
.. nonce: QVaC3f
.. section: Security

:mod:`http.server`: Fix an open redirection vulnerability in the HTTP server
when an URI path starts with ``//``.  Vulnerability discovered, and initial
fix proposed, by Hamza Avvan.

..

.. date: 2022-05-21-23-21-37
.. gh-issue: 93065
.. nonce: 5I18WC
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix contextvars HAMT implementation to handle iteration over deep trees.

The bug was discovered and fixed by Eli Libman. See
`MagicStack/immutables#84
<https://github.com/MagicStack/immutables/issues/84>`_ for more details.

..

.. bpo: 46197
.. date: 2022-01-03-15-07-06
.. nonce: Z0djv6
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`ensurepip` environment isolation for subprocess running ``pip``.

..

.. bpo: 36073
.. date: 2019-06-22-11-01-45
.. nonce: ED8mB9
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`~sqlite3.ProgrammingError` instead of segfaulting on recursive
usage of cursors in :mod:`sqlite3` converters. Patch by Sergey Fedoseev.

..

.. date: 2022-04-24-22-09-31
.. gh-issue: 91888
.. nonce: kTjJLx
.. section: Documentation

Add a new ``gh`` role to the documentation to link to GitHub issues.

..

.. bpo: 47138
.. date: 2022-03-28-12-36-17
.. nonce: TbLXgV
.. section: Documentation

Pin Jinja to a version compatible with Sphinx version 2.4.4.

..

.. date: 2022-06-27-21-27-20
.. gh-issue: 94208
.. nonce: VR6HX-
.. section: Tests

``test_ssl`` is now checking for supported TLS version and protocols in more
tests.

..

.. bpo: 47016
.. date: 2022-03-14-23-28-17
.. nonce: K-t2QX
.. section: Tests

Create a GitHub Actions workflow for verifying bundled pip and setuptools.
Patch by Illia Volochii and Adam Turner.

..

.. bpo: 46114
.. date: 2021-12-17-14-46-19
.. nonce: 9iyZ_9
.. section: Tests

Fix test case for OpenSSL 3.0.1 version. OpenSSL 3.0 uses ``0xMNN00PP0L``.

..

.. bpo: 47194
.. date: 2022-04-01-14-57-40
.. nonce: IB0XL4
.. section: Windows

Update ``zlib`` to v1.2.12 to resolve CVE-2018-25032.
