.. bpo: 39401
.. date: 2020-01-28-20-54-09
.. nonce: he7h_A
.. release date: 2020-02-10
.. section: Security

Avoid unsafe load of ``api-ms-win-core-path-l1-1-0.dll`` at startup on
Windows 7.

..

.. bpo: 39184
.. date: 2020-01-07-00-42-08
.. nonce: fe7NgK
.. section: Security

Add audit events to command execution functions in os and pty modules.

..

.. bpo: 39579
.. date: 2020-02-07-15-18-35
.. nonce: itNmC0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the ending column offset of `Attribute` nodes constructed in
`ast_for_dotted_name` to point at the end of the current node and not at the
end of the last `NAME` node.

..

.. bpo: 39510
.. date: 2020-02-04-10-27-41
.. nonce: PMIh-f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault in ``readinto()`` method on closed BufferedReader.

..

.. bpo: 39492
.. date: 2020-01-30-01-14-42
.. nonce: eTuy0F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference cycle in the C Pickler that was preventing the garbage
collection of deleted, pickled objects.

..

.. bpo: 39421
.. date: 2020-01-22-15-53-37
.. nonce: O3nG7u
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes when operating with the functions in the :mod:`heapq`
module and custom comparison operators.

..

.. bpo: 39386
.. date: 2020-01-20-21-40-57
.. nonce: ULqD8t
.. section: Core and Builtins

Prevent double awaiting of async iterator.

..

.. bpo: 39235
.. date: 2020-01-09-10-01-18
.. nonce: RYwjoc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix AST end location for lone generator expression in function call, e.g.
f(i for i in a).

..

.. bpo: 39209
.. date: 2020-01-06-10-29-16
.. nonce: QHAONe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Correctly handle multi-line tokens in interactive mode. Patch by Pablo
Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 39216
.. date: 2020-01-05-06-55-52
.. nonce: 74jLh9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix constant folding optimization for positional only arguments - by Anthony
Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 39215
.. date: 2020-01-04-17-25-34
.. nonce: xiqiIz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix ``SystemError`` when nested function has annotation on positional-only
argument - by Anthony Sottile.

..

.. bpo: 38588
.. date: 2019-12-29-19-13-54
.. nonce: pgXnNS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes in dict and list when calling
:c:func:`PyObject_RichCompareBool`.

..

.. bpo: 38610
.. date: 2019-10-31-14-30-39
.. nonce: fHdVMS
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix possible crashes in several list methods by holding strong references to
list elements when calling :c:func:`PyObject_RichCompareBool`.

..

.. bpo: 39590
.. date: 2020-02-09-05-51-05
.. nonce: rf98GU
.. section: Library

Collections.deque now holds strong references during deque.__contains__ and
deque.count, fixing crashes.

..

.. bpo: 38149
.. date: 2020-02-05-11-24-16
.. nonce: GWsjHE
.. section: Library

:func:`sys.audit` is now called only once per call of :func:`glob.glob` and
:func:`glob.iglob`.

..

.. bpo: 39450
.. date: 2020-02-02-14-46-34
.. nonce: 48R274
.. section: Library

Striped whitespace from docstring before returning it from
:func:`unittest.case.shortDescription`.

..

.. bpo: 39493
.. date: 2020-01-30-01-13-19
.. nonce: CbFRi7
.. section: Library

Mark ``typing.IO.closed`` as a property

..

.. bpo: 39485
.. date: 2020-01-29-14-58-27
.. nonce: Zy3ot6
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec` that would complain about
the wrong number of arguments for custom descriptors defined in an extension
module returning functions.

..

.. bpo: 39082
.. date: 2020-01-24-13-24-35
.. nonce: qKgrq_
.. section: Library

Allow AsyncMock to correctly patch static/class methods

..

.. bpo: 39430
.. date: 2020-01-24-11-05-21
.. nonce: I0UQzM
.. section: Library

Fixed race condition in lazy imports in :mod:`tarfile`.

..

.. bpo: 39390
.. date: 2020-01-23-21-34-29
.. nonce: D2tSXk
.. section: Library

Fixed a regression with the `ignore` callback of :func:`shutil.copytree`.
The argument types are now str and List[str] again.

..

.. bpo: 39389
.. date: 2020-01-20-00-56-01
.. nonce: fEirIS
.. section: Library

Write accurate compression level metadata in :mod:`gzip` archives, rather
than always signaling maximum compression.

..

.. bpo: 39274
.. date: 2020-01-15-23-13-03
.. nonce: lpc0-n
.. section: Library

``bool(fraction.Fraction)`` now returns a boolean even if (numerator != 0)
does not return a boolean (ex: numpy number).

..

.. bpo: 39297
.. date: 2020-01-11-01-15-37
.. nonce: y98Z6Q
.. section: Library

Improved performance of importlib.metadata distribution discovery and
resilients to inaccessible sys.path entries (importlib_metadata v1.4.0).

..

.. bpo: 39242
.. date: 2020-01-08-23-25-27
.. nonce: bnL65N
.. section: Library

Updated the Gmane domain from news.gmane.org to news.gmane.io which is used
for examples of :class:`~nntplib.NNTP` news reader server and nntplib tests.

..

.. bpo: 38907
.. date: 2020-01-06-02-14-38
.. nonce: F1RkCR
.. section: Library

In http.server script, restore binding to IPv4 on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 39152
.. date: 2020-01-03-18-02-50
.. nonce: JgPjCC
.. section: Library

Fix ttk.Scale.configure([name]) to return configuration tuple for name or
all options.  Giovanni Lombardo contributed part of the patch.

..

.. bpo: 39198
.. date: 2020-01-02-20-21-03
.. nonce: nzwGyG
.. section: Library

If an exception were to be thrown in `Logger.isEnabledFor` (say, by asyncio
timeouts or stopit) , the `logging` global lock may not be released
appropriately, resulting in deadlock.  This change wraps that block of code
with `try...finally` to ensure the lock is released.

..

.. bpo: 39191
.. date: 2020-01-02-17-28-03
.. nonce: ur_scy
.. section: Library

Perform a check for running loop before starting a new task in
``loop.run_until_complete()`` to fail fast; it prevents the side effect of
new task spawning before exception raising.

..

.. bpo: 38871
.. date: 2020-01-01-18-44-52
.. nonce: 3EEOLg
.. section: Library

Correctly parenthesize filter-based statements that contain lambda
expressions in mod:`lib2to3`. Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 39142
.. date: 2019-12-31-19-27-23
.. nonce: oqU5iD
.. section: Library

A change was made to logging.config.dictConfig to avoid converting instances
of named tuples to ConvertingTuple. It's assumed that named tuples are too
specialised to be treated like ordinary tuples; if a user of named tuples
requires ConvertingTuple functionality, they will have to implement that
themselves in their named tuple class.

..

.. bpo: 39129
.. date: 2019-12-24-10-43-13
.. nonce: jVx5rW
.. section: Library

Fix import path for ``asyncio.TimeoutError``

..

.. bpo: 39057
.. date: 2019-12-15-21-47-54
.. nonce: FOxn-w
.. section: Library

:func:`urllib.request.proxy_bypass_environment` now ignores leading dots and
no longer ignores a trailing newline.

..

.. bpo: 39056
.. date: 2019-12-15-21-05-16
.. nonce: nEfUM9
.. section: Library

Fixed handling invalid warning category in the -W option.  No longer import
the re module if it is not needed.

..

.. bpo: 39055
.. date: 2019-12-15-19-23-23
.. nonce: FmN3un
.. section: Library

:func:`base64.b64decode` with ``validate=True`` raises now a binascii.Error
if the input ends with a single ``\n``.

..

.. bpo: 39033
.. date: 2019-12-13-18-54-49
.. nonce: cepuyD
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`NameError` in :mod:`zipimport`. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 38878
.. date: 2019-11-22-12-08-52
.. nonce: EJ0cFf
.. section: Library

Fixed __subclasshook__ of :class:`os.PathLike` to return a correct result
upon inheritence. Patch by Bar Harel.

..

.. bpo: 35182
.. date: 2019-10-31-19-23-25
.. nonce: hzeNl9
.. section: Library

Fixed :func:`Popen.communicate` subsequent call crash when the child process
has already closed any piped standard stream, but still continues to be
running. Patch by Andriy Maletsky.

..

.. bpo: 38473
.. date: 2019-10-14-21-14-55
.. nonce: uXpVld
.. section: Library

Use signature from inner mock for autospecced methods attached with
:func:`unittest.mock.attach_mock`. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 38293
.. date: 2019-09-29-08-17-03
.. nonce: wls5s3
.. section: Library

Add :func:`copy.copy` and :func:`copy.deepcopy` support to :func:`property`
objects.

..

.. bpo: 39153
.. date: 2020-01-27-22-24-51
.. nonce: Pjl8jV
.. section: Documentation

Clarify refcounting semantics for the following functions: -
PyObject_SetItem - PyMapping_SetItemString - PyDict_SetItem -
PyDict_SetItemString

..

.. bpo: 39392
.. date: 2020-01-27-18-18-42
.. nonce: oiqcLO
.. section: Documentation

Explain that when filling with turtle, overlap regions may be left unfilled.

..

.. bpo: 39381
.. date: 2020-01-18-15-37-56
.. nonce: wTWe8d
.. section: Documentation

Mention in docs that :func:`asyncio.get_event_loop` implicitly creates new
event loop only if called from the main thread.

..

.. bpo: 38918
.. date: 2019-12-15-22-04-41
.. nonce: 8JnDTS
.. section: Documentation

Add an entry for ``__module__`` in the "function" & "method" sections of the
`inspect docs types and members table
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/inspect.html#types-and-members>`_

..

.. bpo: 3530
.. date: 2019-11-17-11-53-10
.. nonce: 8zFUMc
.. section: Documentation

In the :mod:`ast` module documentation, fix a misleading ``NodeTransformer``
example and add advice on when to use the ``fix_missing_locations``
function.

..

.. bpo: 39502
.. date: 2020-01-30-15-04-54
.. nonce: chbpII
.. section: Tests

Skip test_zipfile.test_add_file_after_2107() if :func:`time.localtime` fails
with :exc:`OverflowError`. It is the case on AIX 6.1 for example.

..

.. bpo: 38546
.. date: 2019-12-18-14-52-08
.. nonce: 2kxNuM
.. section: Tests

Fix test_ressources_gced_in_workers() of test_concurrent_futures: explicitly
stop the manager to prevent leaking a child process running in the
background after the test completes.

..

.. bpo: 39144
.. date: 2019-12-27-22-18-26
.. nonce: dwHMlR
.. section: Build

The ctags and etags build targets both include Modules/_ctypes and Python
standard library source files.

..

.. bpo: 39439
.. date: 2020-01-24-03-15-05
.. nonce: sFxGfR
.. section: Windows

Honor the Python path when a virtualenv is active on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 39393
.. date: 2020-01-20-23-42-53
.. nonce: gWlJDG
.. section: Windows

Improve the error message when attempting to load a DLL with unresolved
dependencies.

..

.. bpo: 38883
.. date: 2020-01-11-22-53-55
.. nonce: X7FRaN
.. section: Windows

:meth:`~pathlib.Path.home()` and :meth:`~pathlib.Path.expanduser()` on
Windows now prefer :envvar:`USERPROFILE` and no longer use :envvar:`HOME`,
which is not normally set for regular user accounts. This makes them again
behave like :func:`os.path.expanduser`, which was changed to ignore
:envvar:`HOME` in 3.8, see :issue:`36264`.

..

.. bpo: 39185
.. date: 2020-01-02-01-11-53
.. nonce: T4herN
.. section: Windows

The build.bat script has additional options for very-quiet output (-q) and
very-verbose output (-vv)

..

.. bpo: 30780
.. date: 2020-01-27-16-44-29
.. nonce: nR80qu
.. section: IDLE

Add remaining configdialog tests for buttons and highlights and keys tabs.

..

.. bpo: 39388
.. date: 2020-01-25-02-26-45
.. nonce: x4TQNh
.. section: IDLE

IDLE Settings Cancel button now cancels pending changes

..

.. bpo: 39050
.. date: 2020-01-22-22-28-06
.. nonce: zkn0FO
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE Settings dialog Help button work again.

..

.. bpo: 34118
.. date: 2019-12-30-16-44-07
.. nonce: FaNW0a
.. section: IDLE

Tag memoryview, range, and tuple as classes, the same as list, etcetera, in
the library manual built-in functions list.

..

.. bpo: 38792
.. date: 2019-11-13-23-51-39
.. nonce: xhTC5a
.. section: IDLE

Close an IDLE shell calltip if a :exc:`KeyboardInterrupt` or shell restart
occurs.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 32989
.. date: 2018-03-03-12-56-26
.. nonce: FVhmhH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for editor newline_and_indent_event method. Remove dead code from
pyparse find_good_parse_start method.
