.. bpo: 42967
.. date: 2021-02-14-15-59-16
.. nonce: YApqDS
.. release date: 2021-02-16
.. section: Security

Fix web cache poisoning vulnerability by defaulting the query args separator
to ``&``, and allowing the user to choose a custom separator.

..

.. bpo: 42938
.. date: 2021-01-18-09-27-31
.. nonce: 4Zn4Mp
.. section: Security

Avoid static buffers when computing the repr of :class:`ctypes.c_double` and
:class:`ctypes.c_longdouble` values.

..

.. bpo: 42819
.. date: 2021-01-04-23-54-34
.. nonce: 4KO6wU
.. section: Core and Builtins

:mod:`readline`: Explicitly disable bracketed paste in the interactive
interpreter, even if it's set in the inputrc, is enabled by default (eg GNU
Readline 8.1), or a user calls ``readline.read_init_file()``. The Python
REPL has not implemented bracketed paste support. Also, bracketed mode
writes the ``"\x1b[?2004h"`` escape sequence into stdout which causes test
failures in applications that don't support it. It can still be explicitly
enabled by calling ``readline.parse_and_bind("set enable-bracketed-paste
on")``. Patch by Dustin Rodrigues.

..

.. bpo: 43108
.. date: 2021-02-02-20-23-31
.. nonce: lqcCZ6
.. section: Library

Fixed a reference leak in the :mod:`curses` module. Patch by Pablo Galindo

..

.. bpo: 42780
.. date: 2021-01-08-15-49-20
.. nonce: rtqi6B
.. section: Library

Fix os.set_inheritable() for O_PATH file descriptors on Linux.

..

.. bpo: 41748
.. date: 2021-01-05-21-26-29
.. nonce: KdC0w3
.. section: Library

Fix HTMLParser parsing rules for element attributes containing commas with
spaces. Patch by Karl Dubost.

..

.. bpo: 42759
.. date: 2020-12-27-22-19-26
.. nonce: lGi_03
.. section: Library

Fixed equality comparison of :class:`tkinter.Variable` and
:class:`tkinter.font.Font`. Objects which belong to different Tcl
interpreters are now always different, even if they have the same name.

..

.. bpo: 23328
.. date: 2020-12-27-18-47-01
.. nonce: _xqepZ
.. section: Library

Allow / character in username, password fields on _PROXY envars.

..

.. bpo: 42681
.. date: 2020-12-20-22-50-15
.. nonce: lDO6jb
.. section: Library

Fixed range checks for color and pair numbers in :mod:`curses`.

..

.. bpo: 42531
.. date: 2020-12-02-16-28-04
.. nonce: 2sLlFW
.. section: Library

:func:`importlib.resources.path` now works for :term:`package`\ s missing
the optional :attr:`__file__` attribute (more specifically, packages whose
:attr:`__spec__`\ ``.``\ :attr:`~importlib.machinery.ModuleSpec.origin`
:keyword:`is` :data:`None`).

..

.. bpo: 42388
.. date: 2020-11-22-11-22-28
.. nonce: LMgM6B
.. section: Library

Fix subprocess.check_output(..., input=None) behavior when text=True to be
consistent with that of the documentation and universal_newlines=True.

..

.. bpo: 42384
.. date: 2020-11-17-14-32-39
.. nonce: 1ZnQSn
.. section: Library

Make pdb populate sys.path[0] exactly the same as regular python execution.

..

.. bpo: 42383
.. date: 2020-11-17-14-30-12
.. nonce: ubl0Y_
.. section: Library

Fix pdb: previously pdb would fail to restart the debugging target if it was
specified using a relative path and the current directory changed.

..

.. bpo: 42318
.. date: 2020-11-14-13-46-27
.. nonce: wYAcBD
.. section: Library

Fixed support of non-BMP characters in :mod:`tkinter` on macOS.

..

.. bpo: 42005
.. date: 2020-10-11-13-48-03
.. nonce: Jq6Az-
.. section: Library

Fix CLI of :mod:`cProfile` and :mod:`profile` to catch
:exc:`BrokenPipeError`.

..

.. bpo: 41604
.. date: 2020-08-21-15-24-14
.. nonce: rTXleO
.. section: Library

Don't decrement the reference count of the previous user_ptr when
set_panel_userptr fails.

..

.. bpo: 26407
.. date: 2020-05-30-14-19-47
.. nonce: MjWLO1
.. section: Library

Unexpected errors in calling the ``__iter__`` method are no longer masked by
``TypeError`` in :func:`csv.reader`, :func:`csv.writer.writerow` and
:meth:`csv.writer.writerows`.

..

.. bpo: 39068
.. date: 2019-12-16-17-55-31
.. nonce: Ti3f9P
.. section: Library

Fix initialization race condition in :func:`a85encode` and :func:`b85encode`
in :mod:`base64`. Patch by Brandon Stansbury.

..

.. bpo: 36589
.. date: 2019-11-16-22-56-51
.. nonce: 0Io76D
.. section: Library

The :func:`curses.update_lines_cols` function now returns ``None`` instead
of ``1`` on success.

..

.. bpo: 33289
.. date: 2018-04-23-13-44-10
.. nonce: anBnUr
.. section: Library

Correct call to :mod:`tkinter.colorchooser` to return RGB triplet of ints
instead of floats.  Patch by Cheryl Sabella.

..

.. bpo: 40304
.. date: 2021-01-20-23-03-49
.. nonce: -LK7Ps
.. section: Documentation

Fix doc for type(name, bases, dict).  Patch by Boris Verkhovskiy and Éric
Araujo.

..

.. bpo: 42811
.. date: 2021-01-04-22-14-22
.. nonce: HY2beA
.. section: Documentation

Updated importlib.utils.resolve_name() doc to use __spec__.parent instead of
__package__. (Thanks Yair Frid.)

..

.. bpo: 42794
.. date: 2021-01-01-08-52-36
.. nonce: -7-XGz
.. section: Tests

Update test_nntplib to use offical group name of news.aioe.org for testing.
Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 40810
.. date: 2020-05-30-10-56-38
.. nonce: LPqDLQ
.. section: Tests

In :mod:`sqlite3`, fix ``CheckTraceCallbackContent`` for SQLite pre 3.7.15.

..

.. bpo: 29076
.. date: 2020-02-28-14-33-15
.. nonce: Gtixi5
.. section: Build

Add fish shell support to macOS installer.

..

.. bpo: 41837
.. date: 2021-01-05-20-36-40
.. nonce: bmS7vB
.. section: Windows

Updated Windows installer to include OpenSSL 1.1.1i

..

.. bpo: 42584
.. date: 2020-12-07-11-40-52
.. nonce: AsYnVX
.. section: Windows

Upgrade Windows installer to use SQLite 3.34.0.

..

.. bpo: 41837
.. date: 2021-01-04-00-48-08
.. nonce: dX-unJ
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer build to use OpenSSL 1.1.1i.

..

.. bpo: 42584
.. date: 2020-12-07-11-37-35
.. nonce: LygmqQ
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.34.0.

..

.. bpo: 43008
.. date: 2021-01-26-18-12-17
.. nonce: mbQUc7
.. section: IDLE

Make IDLE invoke :func:`sys.excepthook` in normal, 2-process mode. Patch by
Ken Hilton.

..

.. bpo: 33065
.. date: 2021-01-10-01-25-43
.. nonce: zmyHYJ
.. section: IDLE

Fix problem debugging user classes with __repr__ method.

..

.. bpo: 42508
.. date: 2020-11-30-19-46-05
.. nonce: fE7w4M
.. section: IDLE

Keep IDLE running on macOS.  Remove obsolete workaround that prevented
running files with shortcuts when using new universal2 installers built on
macOS 11.

..

.. bpo: 23544
.. date: 2019-11-14-23-41-07
.. nonce: 3etemb
.. section: IDLE

Disable Debug=>Stack Viewer when user code is running or Debugger is active,
to prevent hang or crash.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 32631
.. date: 2019-06-30-20-31-09
.. nonce: e7_4BG
.. section: IDLE

Finish zzdummy example extension module: make menu entries work; add
docstrings and tests with 100% coverage.

..

.. bpo: 42726
.. date: 2020-12-23-19-42-11
.. nonce: a5EkTv
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fixed Python 3 compatibility issue with gdb/libpython.py handling of
attribute dictionaries.

..

.. bpo: 43030
.. date: 2021-01-27-10-27-47
.. nonce: loDcD_
.. section: C API

Fixed a compiler warning in :c:func:`Py_UNICODE_ISSPACE()` on platforms with
signed ``wchar_t``.

..

.. bpo: 40052
.. date: 2020-03-24-09-27-10
.. nonce: 27P2KG
.. section: C API

Fix an alignment build warning/error in function
``PyVectorcall_Function()``. Patch by Andreas Schneider, Antoine Pitrou and
Petr Viktorin.
