.. bpo: 39382
.. date: 2020-02-18-01-40-13
.. nonce: OLSJu9
.. release date: 2020-02-24
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free in the single inheritance path of ``issubclass()``,
when the ``__bases__`` of an object has a single reference, and so does its
first item. Patch by Yonatan Goldschmidt.

..

.. bpo: 39427
.. date: 2020-01-22-22-28-04
.. nonce: LiO-Eo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Document all possibilities for the ``-X`` options in the command line help
section. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 39649
.. date: 2020-02-23-21-27-10
.. nonce: qiubSp
.. section: Library

Remove obsolete check for `__args__` in bdb.Bdb.format_stack_entry.

..

.. bpo: 39681
.. date: 2020-02-21-13-58-40
.. nonce: zN8hf0
.. section: Library

Fix a regression where the C pickle module wouldn't allow unpickling from a
file-like object that doesn't expose a readinto() method.

..

.. bpo: 39546
.. date: 2020-02-03-15-12-51
.. nonce: _Kj0Pn
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in :class:`~argparse.ArgumentParser` where
``allow_abbrev=False`` was ignored for long options that used a prefix
character other than "-".

..

.. bpo: 39432
.. date: 2020-01-23-16-08-58
.. nonce: Cee6mi
.. section: Library

Implement PEP-489 algorithm for non-ascii "PyInit\_..." symbol names in
distutils to make it export the correct init symbol also on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 17422
.. date: 2020-02-19-11-13-47
.. nonce: g7_9zz
.. section: Documentation

The language reference now specifies restrictions on class namespaces.
Adapted from a patch by Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 39572
.. date: 2020-02-18-18-37-07
.. nonce: CCtzy1
.. section: Documentation

Updated documentation of ``total`` flag of TypeDict.

..

.. bpo: 39654
.. date: 2020-02-18-07-42-20
.. nonce: MoT1jI
.. section: Documentation

In pyclbr doc, update 'class' to 'module' where appropriate and add
readmodule comment. Patch by Hakan Çelik.

..

.. bpo: 39663
.. date: 2020-02-17-21-09-03
.. nonce: wexcsH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for pyparse find_good_parse_start().
