.. bpo: 41654
.. date: 2020-08-30-20-38-33
.. nonce: HtnhAM
.. release date: 2020-09-07
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash that occurred when destroying subclasses of
:class:`MemoryError`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 41533
.. date: 2020-08-12-20-29-57
.. nonce: 4pcVAc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Free the stack allocated in ``va_build_stack`` if ``do_mkstack`` fails and
the stack is not a ``small_stack``.

..

.. bpo: 38156
.. date: 2020-07-20-17-01-17
.. nonce: ptcdRy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Handle interrupts that come after EOF correctly in ``PyOS_StdioReadline``.

..

.. bpo: 41696
.. date: 2020-09-03-01-35-32
.. nonce: zkYGre
.. section: Library

Fix handling of debug mode in :func:`asyncio.run`. This allows setting
``PYTHONASYNCIODEBUG`` or ``-X dev`` to enable asyncio debug mode when using
:func:`asyncio.run`.

..

.. bpo: 39010
.. date: 2020-08-30-10-24-26
.. nonce: _mzXJW
.. section: Library

Restarting a ``ProactorEventLoop`` on Windows no longer logs spurious
``ConnectionResetErrors``.

..

.. bpo: 41609
.. date: 2020-08-21-15-51-15
.. nonce: JmiUKG
.. section: Library

The pdb whatis command correctly reports instance methods as 'Method' rather
than 'Function'.

..

.. bpo: 32751
.. date: 2020-08-15-15-50-12
.. nonce: 85je5X
.. section: Library

When cancelling the task due to a timeout, :meth:`asyncio.wait_for` will now
wait until the cancellation is complete also in the case when *timeout* is
<= 0, like it does with positive timeouts.

..

.. bpo: 37658
.. date: 2020-08-15-15-21-40
.. nonce: f9nivB
.. section: Library

:meth:`asyncio.wait_for` now properly handles races between cancellation of
itself and the completion of the wrapped awaitable.

..

.. bpo: 40782
.. date: 2020-08-13-08-07-25
.. nonce: aGZqmB
.. section: Library

Change the method asyncio.AbstractEventLoop.run_in_executor to not be a
coroutine.

..

.. bpo: 41520
.. date: 2020-08-12-13-25-16
.. nonce: BEUWa4
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`codeop` regression that prevented turning compile warnings into
errors.

..

.. bpo: 41503
.. date: 2020-08-07-15-18-16
.. nonce: IYftcu
.. section: Library

Fixed a race between setTarget and flush in logging.handlers.MemoryHandler.

..

.. bpo: 41497
.. date: 2020-08-07-06-06-29
.. nonce: aBtsWz
.. section: Library

Fix potential UnicodeDecodeError in dis module.

..

.. bpo: 41490
.. date: 2020-08-05-23-16-39
.. nonce: 6z47A_
.. section: Library

Update :mod:`ensurepip` to install pip 20.2.1 and setuptools 49.2.1.

..

.. bpo: 41467
.. date: 2020-08-04-00-20-30
.. nonce: Z8DgTL
.. section: Library

On Windows, fix asyncio ``recv_into()`` return value when the socket/pipe is
closed (:exc:`BrokenPipeError`): return ``0`` rather than an empty byte
string (``b''``).

..

.. bpo: 41425
.. date: 2020-08-03-01-59-48
.. nonce: KJo6zF
.. section: Library

Make tkinter doc example runnable.

..

.. bpo: 41384
.. date: 2020-07-26-21-18-43
.. nonce: MlzIgV
.. section: Library

Raise TclError instead of TypeError when an unknown option is passed to
tkinter.OptionMenu.

..

.. bpo: 38731
.. date: 2020-07-25-23-18-51
.. nonce: Am4wp2
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`NameError` in command-line interface of :mod:`py_compile`.

..

.. bpo: 41364
.. date: 2020-07-21-21-45-55
.. nonce: 5O-k7A
.. section: Library

Reduce import overhead of :mod:`uuid`.

..

.. bpo: 41344
.. date: 2020-07-20-13-27-48
.. nonce: iKipNd
.. section: Library

Prevent creating :class:`shared_memory.SharedMemory` objects with
:code:`size=0`.

..

.. bpo: 40726
.. date: 2020-05-22-12-45-58
.. nonce: 7oBdMw
.. section: Library

Handle cases where the ``end_lineno`` is ``None`` on
:func:`ast.increment_lineno`.

..

.. bpo: 31122
.. date: 2020-03-11-07-44-06
.. nonce: zIQ80l
.. section: Library

ssl.wrap_socket() now raises ssl.SSLEOFError rather than OSError when peer
closes connection during TLS negotiation

..

.. bpo: 33660
.. date: 2018-06-12-23-30-41
.. nonce: AdDn5Z
.. section: Library

Fix pathlib.PosixPath to resolve a relative path located on the root
directory properly.

..

.. bpo: 41624
.. date: 2020-08-25-15-11-23
.. nonce: ddjJlN
.. section: Documentation

Fix the signature of :class:`typing.Coroutine`.

..

.. bpo: 40204
.. date: 2020-08-12-18-35-40
.. nonce: C8A_pe
.. section: Documentation

Enable Sphinx 3.2 ``c_allow_pre_v3`` option and disable
``c_warn_on_allowed_pre_v3`` option to make the documentation compatible
with Sphinx 2 and Sphinx 3.

..

.. bpo: 41045
.. date: 2020-07-27-20-46-17
.. nonce: GFF6Ul
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation for debug feature of f-strings.

..

.. bpo: 41314
.. date: 2020-07-25-14-20-00
.. nonce: yrjko0
.. section: Documentation

Changed the release when ``from __future__ import annotations`` becomes the
default from ``4.0`` to ``3.10`` (following a change in PEP 563).

..

.. bpo: 39883
.. date: 2020-03-07-03-53-39
.. nonce: 1tnb4-
.. section: Documentation

Make code, examples, and recipes in the Python documentation be licensed
under the more permissive BSD0 license in addition to the existing Python
2.0 license.

..

.. bpo: 41492
.. date: 2020-08-06-16-59-10
.. nonce: 2FQ9cM
.. section: Windows

Fixes the description that appears in UAC prompts.

..

.. bpo: 40741
.. date: 2020-07-20-23-26-26
.. nonce: C9sc_d
.. section: Windows

Update Windows release to include SQLite 3.32.3.

..

.. bpo: 41468
.. date: 2020-08-09-13-42-55
.. nonce: zkP0_Y
.. section: IDLE

Improve IDLE run crash error message (which users should never see).

..

.. bpo: 41373
.. date: 2020-07-24-17-49-58
.. nonce: YQIPu_
.. section: IDLE

Save files loaded with no line ending, as when blank, or different line
endings, by setting its line ending to the system default. Fix regression in
3.8.4 and 3.9.0b4.

..

.. bpo: 41524
.. date: 2020-08-12-17-09-06
.. nonce: u6Xfr2
.. section: C API

Fix bug in PyOS_mystrnicmp and PyOS_mystricmp that incremented pointers
beyond the end of a string.
