.. bpo: 41162
.. date: 2020-07-03-20-41-29
.. nonce: tb8pVj
.. release date: 2020-07-13
.. section: Security

Audit hooks are now cleared later during finalization to avoid missing
events.

..

.. bpo: 29778
.. date: 2020-07-03-17-21-37
.. nonce: cR_fGS
.. section: Security

Ensure :file:`python3.dll` is loaded from correct locations when Python is
embedded (CVE-2020-15523).

..

.. bpo: 41247
.. date: 2020-07-08-22-03-54
.. nonce: PndYIk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Always cache the running loop holder when running
``asyncio.set_running_loop``.

..

.. bpo: 41252
.. date: 2020-07-08-21-55-23
.. nonce: nBWL-Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect refcounting in _ssl.c's ``_servername_callback()``.

..

.. bpo: 41218
.. date: 2020-07-06-13-35-17
.. nonce: oKnSr2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python 3.8.3 had a regression where compiling with
ast.PyCF_ALLOW_TOP_LEVEL_AWAIT would aggressively mark list comprehension
with CO_COROUTINE. Now only list comprehension making use of async/await
will tagged as so.

..

.. bpo: 41175
.. date: 2020-06-30-20-17-31
.. nonce: acJoXB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Guard against a NULL pointer dereference within bytearrayobject triggered by
the ``bytearray() + bytearray()`` operation.

..

.. bpo: 39960
.. date: 2020-06-23-18-32-41
.. nonce: Kez3fP
.. section: Core and Builtins

The "hackcheck" that prevents sneaking around a type's __setattr__() by
calling the superclass method was rewritten to allow C implemented heap
types.

..

.. bpo: 41235
.. date: 2020-07-07-21-56-26
.. nonce: H2csMU
.. section: Library

Fix the error handling in :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.load_dh_params`.

..

.. bpo: 41193
.. date: 2020-07-02-11-53-45
.. nonce: 8-Tnql
.. section: Library

The ``write_history()`` atexit function of the readline completer now
ignores any :exc:`OSError` to ignore error if the filesystem is read-only,
instead of only ignoring :exc:`FileNotFoundError` and
:exc:`PermissionError`.

..

.. bpo: 41043
.. date: 2020-06-20-00-19-30
.. nonce: p-Pk-H
.. section: Library

Fixed the use of :func:`~glob.glob` in the stdlib: literal part of the path
is now always correctly escaped.

..

.. bpo: 39384
.. date: 2020-05-30-12-44-29
.. nonce: Iqxy3q
.. section: Library

Fixed email.contentmanager to allow set_content() to set a null string.

..

.. bpo: 37765
.. date: 2020-07-07-18-44-30
.. nonce: umc1o8
.. section: IDLE

Add keywords to module name completion list.  Rewrite Completions section of
IDLE doc.

..

.. bpo: 41152
.. date: 2020-06-29-14-51-15
.. nonce: d6mV0C
.. section: IDLE

The encoding of ``stdin``, ``stdout`` and ``stderr`` in IDLE is now always
UTF-8.
