.. bpo: 41304
.. date: 2020-07-15-20-15-08
.. nonce: vNEeYA
.. release date: 2020-07-20
.. section: Security

Fixes `python3x._pth` being ignored on Windows, caused by the fix for
:issue:`29778` (CVE-2020-15801).

..

.. bpo: 41162
.. date: 2020-07-03-20-41-29
.. nonce: tb8pVj
.. section: Security

Audit hooks are now cleared later during finalization to avoid missing
events.

..

.. bpo: 29778
.. date: 2020-07-03-17-21-37
.. nonce: cR_fGS
.. section: Security

Ensure :file:`python3.dll` is loaded from correct locations when Python is
embedded (CVE-2020-15523).

..

.. bpo: 39603
.. date: 2020-02-12-14-17-39
.. nonce: Gt3RSg
.. section: Security

Prevent http header injection by rejecting control characters in
http.client.putrequest(...).

..

.. bpo: 41295
.. date: 2020-07-18-08-15-32
.. nonce: pu8Ezo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Resolve a regression in CPython 3.8.4 where defining "__setattr__" in a
multi-inheritance setup and calling up the hierarchy chain could fail if
builtins/extension types were involved in the base types.

..

.. bpo: 41247
.. date: 2020-07-08-22-03-54
.. nonce: PndYIk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Always cache the running loop holder when running
``asyncio.set_running_loop``.

..

.. bpo: 41252
.. date: 2020-07-08-21-55-23
.. nonce: nBWL-Y
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix incorrect refcounting in _ssl.c's ``_servername_callback()``.

..

.. bpo: 41215
.. date: 2020-07-06-18-36-33
.. nonce: vFGFIz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Use non-NULL default values in the PEG parser keyword list to overcome a bug
that was preventing Python from being properly compiled when using the XLC
compiler. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 41218
.. date: 2020-07-06-13-35-17
.. nonce: oKnSr2
.. section: Core and Builtins

Python 3.8.3 had a regression where compiling with
ast.PyCF_ALLOW_TOP_LEVEL_AWAIT would aggressively mark list comprehension
with CO_COROUTINE. Now only list comprehension making use of async/await
will tagged as so.

..

.. bpo: 41175
.. date: 2020-06-30-20-17-31
.. nonce: acJoXB
.. section: Core and Builtins

Guard against a NULL pointer dereference within bytearrayobject triggered by
the ``bytearray() + bytearray()`` operation.

..

.. bpo: 39960
.. date: 2020-06-23-18-32-41
.. nonce: Kez3fP
.. section: Core and Builtins

The "hackcheck" that prevents sneaking around a type's __setattr__() by
calling the superclass method was rewritten to allow C implemented heap
types.

..

.. bpo: 41288
.. date: 2020-07-13-15-06-35
.. nonce: 8mn5P-
.. section: Library

Unpickling invalid NEWOBJ_EX opcode with the C implementation raises now
UnpicklingError instead of crashing.

..

.. bpo: 39017
.. date: 2020-07-12-22-16-58
.. nonce: x3Cg-9
.. section: Library

Avoid infinite loop when reading specially crafted TAR files using the
tarfile module (CVE-2019-20907).

..

.. bpo: 41235
.. date: 2020-07-07-21-56-26
.. nonce: H2csMU
.. section: Library

Fix the error handling in :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.load_dh_params`.

..

.. bpo: 41207
.. date: 2020-07-06-16-58-53
.. nonce: Emw7Nk
.. section: Library

In distutils.spawn, restore expectation that DistutilsExecError is raised
when the command is not found.

..

.. bpo: 39168
.. date: 2020-07-04-21-56-46
.. nonce: DQWsXj
.. section: Library

Remove the ``__new__`` method of :class:`typing.Generic`.

..

.. bpo: 41194
.. date: 2020-07-03-13-15-08
.. nonce: djrKjs
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in the ``_ast`` module: it can no longer be loaded more than
once. It now uses a global state rather than a module state.

..

.. bpo: 39384
.. date: 2020-05-30-12-44-29
.. nonce: Iqxy3q
.. section: Library

Fixed email.contentmanager to allow set_content() to set a null string.

..

.. bpo: 37703
.. date: 2019-08-16-20-25-42
.. nonce: Qm_l_H
.. section: Documentation

Updated Documentation to comprehensively elaborate on the behaviour of
gather.cancel()

..

.. bpo: 40741
.. date: 2020-06-19-14-19-08
.. nonce: L7yTbm
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use SQLite 3.32.3.

..

.. bpo: 41300
.. date: 2020-07-16-17-39-06
.. nonce: wRixNb
.. section: IDLE

Save files with non-ascii chars. Fix regression released in 3.9.0b4 and
3.8.4.

..

.. bpo: 37765
.. date: 2020-07-07-18-44-30
.. nonce: umc1o8
.. section: IDLE

Add keywords to module name completion list.  Rewrite Completions section of
IDLE doc.

..

.. bpo: 40170
.. date: 2020-07-08-10-14-52
.. nonce: N6Qx1i
.. section: C API

Revert :c:func:`PyType_HasFeature` change: it reads again directly the
:c:member:`PyTypeObject.tp_flags` member when the limited C API is not used,
rather than always calling :c:func:`PyType_GetFlags` which hides
implementation details.
