.. date: 2022-05-12-18-59-27
.. gh-issue: 92311
.. nonce: VEgtts
.. release date: 2022-05-17
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a bug where setting ``frame.f_lineno`` to jump over a list
comprehension could misbehave or crash.

..

.. date: 2022-05-01-10-58-38
.. gh-issue: 92112
.. nonce: lLJemu
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crash triggered by an evil custom ``mro()`` on a metaclass.

..

.. date: 2022-04-28-23-37-30
.. gh-issue: 92036
.. nonce: GZJAC9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in subinterpreters related to the garbage collector. When a
subinterpreter is deleted, untrack all objects tracked by its GC. To prevent
a crash in deallocator functions expecting objects to be tracked by the GC,
leak a strong reference to these objects on purpose, so they are never
deleted and their deallocator functions are not called. Patch by Victor
Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-04-10-22-57-27
.. gh-issue: 91421
.. nonce: dHhv6U
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential integer overflow in _Py_DecodeUTF8Ex.

..

.. bpo: 46775
.. date: 2022-03-30-02-36-25
.. nonce: e3Oxqf
.. section: Core and Builtins

Some Windows system error codes(>= 10000) are now mapped into the correct
errno and may now raise a subclass of :exc:`OSError`. Patch by Dong-hee Na.

..

.. bpo: 46962
.. date: 2022-03-08-21-59-57
.. nonce: UomDfz
.. section: Core and Builtins

Classes and functions that unconditionally declared their docstrings
ignoring the `--without-doc-strings` compilation flag no longer do so.

The classes affected are :class:`pickle.PickleBuffer`,
:class:`testcapi.RecursingInfinitelyError`, and :class:`types.GenericAlias`.

The functions affected are 24 methods in :mod:`ctypes`.

Patch by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. bpo: 36819
.. date: 2021-09-28-10-58-30
.. nonce: cyV50C
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix crashes in built-in encoders with error handlers that return position
less or equal than the starting position of non-encodable characters.

..

.. date: 2022-05-11-14-34-09
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: glkou2
.. section: Library

:meth:`~datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp` no longer attempts to resolve
``fold`` in the pure Python implementation, since the fold is never 1 in
UTC. In addition to being slightly faster in the common case, this also
prevents some errors when the timestamp is close to :attr:`datetime.min
<datetime.datetime.min>`.  Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. date: 2022-05-09-09-28-02
.. gh-issue: 92530
.. nonce: M4Q1RS
.. section: Library

Fix an issue that occurred after interrupting
:func:`threading.Condition.notify`.

..

.. date: 2022-04-30-10-53-10
.. gh-issue: 92049
.. nonce: 5SEKoh
.. section: Library

Forbid pickling constants ``re._constants.SUCCESS`` etc. Previously,
pickling did not fail, but the result could not be unpickled.

..

.. bpo: 47029
.. date: 2022-04-26-19-01-13
.. nonce: qkT42X
.. section: Library

Always close the read end of the pipe used by :class:`multiprocessing.Queue`
*after* the last write of buffered data to the write end of the pipe to
avoid :exc:`BrokenPipeError` at garbage collection and at
:meth:`multiprocessing.Queue.close` calls. Patch by Géry Ogam.

..

.. date: 2022-04-25-14-18-01
.. gh-issue: 91910
.. nonce: kY-JR0
.. section: Library

Add missing f prefix to f-strings in error messages from the
:mod:`multiprocessing` and :mod:`asyncio` modules.

..

.. date: 2022-04-25-10-23-01
.. gh-issue: 91810
.. nonce: DOHa6B
.. section: Library

:class:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree` method
:meth:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.ElementTree.write` and function
:func:`~xml.etree.ElementTree.tostring` now use the text file's encoding
("UTF-8" if not available) instead of locale encoding in XML declaration
when ``encoding="unicode"`` is specified.

..

.. date: 2022-04-23-03-24-00
.. gh-issue: 91832
.. nonce: TyLi65
.. section: Library

Add ``required`` attribute to :class:`argparse.Action` repr output.

..

.. date: 2022-04-20-09-49-33
.. gh-issue: 91734
.. nonce: 4Dj4Gy
.. section: Library

Fix OSS audio support on Solaris.

..

.. date: 2022-04-19-17-30-17
.. gh-issue: 91700
.. nonce: MRJi6m
.. section: Library

Compilation of regular expression containing a conditional expression
``(?(group)...)`` now raises an appropriate :exc:`re.error` if the group
number refers to not defined group. Previously an internal RuntimeError was
raised.

..

.. date: 2022-04-19-04-33-39
.. gh-issue: 91676
.. nonce: ceQBwh
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` to shutdown the per test event
loop executor before returning from its ``run`` method so that a not yet
stopped or garbage collected executor state does not persist beyond the
test.

..

.. date: 2022-04-18-16-31-33
.. gh-issue: 90568
.. nonce: 9kiU7o
.. section: Library

Parsing ``\N`` escapes of Unicode Named Character Sequences in a
:mod:`regular expression <re>` raises now :exc:`re.error` instead of
``TypeError``.

..

.. date: 2022-04-16-05-12-13
.. gh-issue: 91595
.. nonce: CocJBv
.. section: Library

Fix the comparison of character and integer inside
:func:`Tools.gdb.libpython.write_repr`. Patch by Yu Liu.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-22-07-36
.. gh-issue: 90622
.. nonce: 0C6l8h
.. section: Library

Worker processes for :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` are no
longer spawned on demand (a feature added in 3.9) when the multiprocessing
context start method is ``"fork"`` as that can lead to deadlocks in the
child processes due to a fork happening while threads are running.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-18-38-21
.. gh-issue: 91575
.. nonce: fSyAxS
.. section: Library

Update case-insensitive matching in the :mod:`re` module to the latest
Unicode version.

..

.. date: 2022-04-15-13-16-25
.. gh-issue: 91581
.. nonce: 9OGsrN
.. section: Library

Remove an unhandled error case in the C implementation of calls to
:meth:`datetime.fromtimestamp <datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp>` with no
time zone (i.e. getting a local time from an epoch timestamp). This should
have no user-facing effect other than giving a possibly more accurate error
message when called with timestamps that fall on 10000-01-01 in the local
time. Patch by Paul Ganssle.

..

.. bpo: 34480
.. date: 2022-04-09-11-28-49
.. nonce: Pw-GJ6
.. section: Library

Fix a bug where :mod:`_markupbase` raised an :exc:`UnboundLocalError` when
an invalid keyword was found in marked section. Patch by Marek Suscak.

..

.. bpo: 27929
.. date: 2022-03-28-13-35-50
.. nonce: j5mAmV
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`asyncio.loop.sock_connect` to only resolve names for
:const:`socket.AF_INET` or :const:`socket.AF_INET6` families. Resolution may
not make sense for other families, like :const:`socket.AF_BLUETOOTH` and
:const:`socket.AF_UNIX`.

..

.. bpo: 43323
.. date: 2022-03-27-12-40-16
.. nonce: 9mFPuI
.. section: Library

Fix errors in the :mod:`email` module if the charset itself contains
undecodable/unencodable characters.

..

.. bpo: 46787
.. date: 2022-02-18-20-09-29
.. nonce: juwWc0
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` exception memory leak

..

.. bpo: 46415
.. date: 2022-01-17-16-53-30
.. nonce: 6wSYg-
.. section: Library

Fix ipaddress.ip_{address,interface,network} raising TypeError instead of
ValueError if given invalid tuple as address parameter.

..

.. bpo: 44911
.. date: 2021-08-14-00-55-16
.. nonce: uk3hYk
.. section: Library

:class:`~unittest.IsolatedAsyncioTestCase` will no longer throw an exception
while cancelling leaked tasks. Patch by Bar Harel.

..

.. bpo: 44493
.. date: 2021-07-26-10-46-49
.. nonce: xp3CRH
.. section: Library

Add missing terminated NUL in sockaddr_un's length

This was potentially observable when using non-abstract AF_UNIX datagram
sockets to processes written in another programming language.

..

.. bpo: 42627
.. date: 2021-05-22-07-58-59
.. nonce: EejtD0
.. section: Library

Fix incorrect parsing of Windows registry proxy settings

..

.. bpo: 36073
.. date: 2019-06-22-11-01-45
.. nonce: ED8mB9
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`~sqlite3.ProgrammingError` instead of segfaulting on recursive
usage of cursors in :mod:`sqlite3` converters. Patch by Sergey Fedoseev.

..

.. date: 2022-04-24-22-09-31
.. gh-issue: 91888
.. nonce: kTjJLx
.. section: Documentation

Add a new ``gh`` role to the documentation to link to GitHub issues.

..

.. date: 2022-04-23-00-22-54
.. gh-issue: 91783
.. nonce: N09dRR
.. section: Documentation

Document security issues concerning the use of the function
:meth:`shutil.unpack_archive`

..

.. date: 2022-04-19-20-16-00
.. gh-issue: 91547
.. nonce: LsNWER
.. section: Documentation

Remove "Undocumented modules" page.

..

.. bpo: 44347
.. date: 2022-04-10-20-28-20
.. nonce: Q1m3DM
.. section: Documentation

Clarify the meaning of *dirs_exist_ok*, a kwarg of :func:`shutil.copytree`.

..

.. bpo: 38668
.. date: 2022-04-01-09-28-31
.. nonce: j4mrqW
.. section: Documentation

Update the introduction to documentation for :mod:`os.path` to remove
warnings that became irrelevant after the implementations of :pep:`383` and
:pep:`529`.

..

.. bpo: 47138
.. date: 2022-03-28-12-32-17
.. nonce: TbLXgV
.. section: Documentation

Pin Jinja to a version compatible with Sphinx version 2.4.4.

..

.. bpo: 46962
.. date: 2022-03-08-22-10-38
.. nonce: FIVe9I
.. section: Documentation

All docstrings in code snippets are now wrapped into :func:`PyDoc_STR` to
follow the guideline of `PEP 7's Documentation Strings paragraph
<https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0007/#documentation-strings>`_. Patch
by Oleg Iarygin.

..

.. bpo: 26792
.. date: 2022-01-23-20-44-53
.. nonce: dQ1v1W
.. section: Documentation

Improve the docstrings of :func:`runpy.run_module` and
:func:`runpy.run_path`. Original patch by Andrew Brezovsky.

..

.. bpo: 45790
.. date: 2021-11-12-11-03-55
.. nonce: 6yuhe8
.. section: Documentation

Adjust inaccurate phrasing in :doc:`../extending/newtypes_tutorial` about
the ``ob_base`` field and the macros used to access its contents.

..

.. bpo: 42340
.. date: 2020-11-12-21-26-31
.. nonce: apumUL
.. section: Documentation

Document that in some circumstances :exc:`KeyboardInterrupt` may cause the
code to enter an inconsistent state. Provided a sample workaround to avoid
it if needed.

..

.. bpo: 41233
.. date: 2020-07-07-22-54-51
.. nonce: lyUJ8L
.. section: Documentation

Link the errnos referenced in ``Doc/library/exceptions.rst`` to their
respective section in ``Doc/library/errno.rst``, and vice versa. Previously
this was only done for EINTR and InterruptedError. Patch by Yan "yyyyyyyan"
Orestes.

..

.. bpo: 38056
.. date: 2019-09-12-08-28-17
.. nonce: 6ktYkc
.. section: Documentation

Overhaul the :ref:`error-handlers` documentation in :mod:`codecs`.

..

.. bpo: 13553
.. date: 2017-12-10-19-13-39
.. nonce: gQbZs4
.. section: Documentation

Document tkinter.Tk args.

..

.. date: 2022-04-16-17-54-05
.. gh-issue: 91607
.. nonce: FnXjtW
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_concurrent_futures`` to test the correct multiprocessing start
method context in several cases where the test logic mixed this up.

..

.. bpo: 47205
.. date: 2022-04-03-14-38-21
.. nonce: hbbTnh
.. section: Tests

Skip test for :func:`~os.sched_getaffinity` and
:func:`~os.sched_setaffinity` error case on FreeBSD.

..

.. bpo: 29890
.. date: 2022-01-24-21-31-09
.. nonce: zEG-ra
.. section: Tests

Add tests for :class:`ipaddress.IPv4Interface` and
:class:`ipaddress.IPv6Interface` construction with tuple arguments. Original
patch and tests by louisom.

..

.. bpo: 47103
.. date: 2022-03-23-20-01-16
.. nonce: b4-00F
.. section: Build

Windows ``PGInstrument`` builds now copy a required DLL into the output
directory, making it easier to run the profile stage of a PGO build.

..

.. bpo: 47194
.. date: 2022-04-01-14-57-40
.. nonce: IB0XL4
.. section: Windows

Update ``zlib`` to v1.2.12 to resolve CVE-2018-25032.

..

.. bpo: 46785
.. date: 2022-03-13-20-35-41
.. nonce: Pnknyl
.. section: Windows

Fix race condition between :func:`os.stat` and unlinking a file on Windows,
by using errors codes returned by ``FindFirstFileW()`` when appropriate in
``win32_xstat_impl``.

..

.. bpo: 40859
.. date: 2020-06-04-10-42-04
.. nonce: isKSw7
.. section: Windows

Update Windows build to use xz-5.2.5

..

.. date: 2022-04-20-14-26-14
.. gh-issue: 91583
.. nonce: 200qI0
.. section: Tools/Demos

Fix regression in the code generated by Argument Clinic for functions with
the ``defining_class`` parameter.
