.. bpo: 39184
.. date: 2020-02-07-23-54-18
.. nonce: v-ue-v
.. release date: 2020-02-25
.. section: Security

Add audit events to functions in ``fcntl``, ``msvcrt``, ``os``, ``resource``,
``shutil``, ``signal`` and ``syslog``.

..

.. bpo: 39401
.. date: 2020-01-28-20-54-09
.. nonce: he7h_A
.. section: Security

Avoid unsafe DLL load at startup on Windows 7 and earlier.

..

.. bpo: 39184
.. date: 2020-01-07-00-42-08
.. nonce: fe7NgK
.. section: Security

Add audit events to command execution functions in os and pty modules.

..

.. bpo: 39382
.. date: 2020-02-18-01-40-13
.. nonce: OLSJu9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a use-after-free in the single inheritance path of ``issubclass()``,
when the ``__bases__`` of an object has a single reference, and so does its
first item. Patch by Yonatan Goldschmidt.

..

.. bpo: 39573
.. date: 2020-02-14-10-08-53
.. nonce: BIIX2M
.. section: Core and Builtins

Update clinic tool to use :c:func:`Py_IS_TYPE`. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. bpo: 39619
.. date: 2020-02-13-07-35-00
.. nonce: inb_master_chroot
.. section: Core and Builtins

Enable use of :func:`os.chroot` on HP-UX systems.

..

.. bpo: 39573
.. date: 2020-02-13-01-30-22
.. nonce: uTFj1m
.. section: Core and Builtins

Add :c:func:`Py_IS_TYPE` static inline function to check whether the object
*o* type is *type*.

..

.. bpo: 39606
.. date: 2020-02-11-23-59-07
.. nonce: a72Sxc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix regression caused by fix for bpo-39386, that prevented calling
``aclose`` on an async generator that had already been closed or exhausted.

..

.. bpo: 39579
.. date: 2020-02-07-15-18-35
.. nonce: itNmC0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Change the ending column offset of ``Attribute`` nodes constructed in
``ast_for_dotted_name`` to point at the end of the current node and not at the
end of the last ``NAME`` node.

..

.. bpo: 1635741
.. date: 2020-02-07-12-57-40
.. nonce: ySW6gq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Port _crypt extension module to multiphase initialization (:pep:`489`).

..

.. bpo: 1635741
.. date: 2020-02-06-09-00-35
.. nonce: oaxe1j
.. section: Core and Builtins

Port _contextvars extension module to multiphase initialization
(:pep:`489`).

..

.. bpo: 39510
.. date: 2020-02-04-10-27-41
.. nonce: PMIh-f
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix segfault in ``readinto()`` method on closed BufferedReader.

..

.. bpo: 39502
.. date: 2020-01-30-14-36-31
.. nonce: IJu0rl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :func:`time.localtime` on 64-bit AIX  to support years before 1902 and
after 2038. Patch by M Felt.

..

.. bpo: 39492
.. date: 2020-01-30-01-14-42
.. nonce: eTuy0F
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a reference cycle in the C Pickler that was preventing the garbage
collection of deleted, pickled objects.

..

.. bpo: 39453
.. date: 2020-01-25-23-51-17
.. nonce: xCOkYk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a possible crash in :meth:`list.__contains__` when a list is changed
during comparing items. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. bpo: 39434
.. date: 2020-01-24-01-07-04
.. nonce: S5ehj9
.. section: Core and Builtins

:term:`floor division` of float operation now has a better performance. Also
the message of :exc:`ZeroDivisionError` for this operation is updated. Patch
by Donghee Na.

..

.. bpo: 1635741
.. date: 2020-01-19-11-06-30
.. nonce: 0mjsfm
.. section: Core and Builtins

Port _codecs extension module to multiphase initialization (:pep:`489`).

..

.. bpo: 1635741
.. date: 2020-01-18-11-06-28
.. nonce: OKROOt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Port _bz2 extension module to multiphase initialization (:pep:`489`).

..

.. bpo: 1635741
.. date: 2020-01-16-12-00-04
.. nonce: fuqoBG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Port _abc extension module to multiphase initialization (:pep:`489`).

..

.. bpo: 39320
.. date: 2020-01-15-15-50-22
.. nonce: oWARyk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Replace two complex bytecodes for building dicts with two simpler ones. The
new bytecodes ``DICT_MERGE`` and ``DICT_UPDATE`` have been added The old
bytecodes ``BUILD_MAP_UNPACK`` and ``BUILD_MAP_UNPACK_WITH_CALL`` have been
removed.

..

.. bpo: 39219
.. date: 2020-01-05-13-36-08
.. nonce: uHtKd4
.. section: Core and Builtins

Syntax errors raised in the tokenizer now always set correct "text" and
"offset" attributes.

..

.. bpo: 36051
.. date: 2019-12-30-15-56-07
.. nonce: imaVlq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Drop the GIL during large ``bytes.join`` operations. Patch by Bruce Merry.

..

.. bpo: 38960
.. date: 2019-12-03-16-41-22
.. nonce: kvoFM0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix DTrace build issues on FreeBSD. Patch by David Carlier.

..

.. bpo: 37207
.. date: 2019-06-09-10-54-31
.. nonce: bLjgLR
.. section: Core and Builtins

Speed up calls to ``range()`` by about 30%, by using the PEP 590
``vectorcall`` calling convention. Patch by Mark Shannon.

..

.. bpo: 36144
.. date: 2019-03-02-23-03-34
.. nonce: LRl4LS
.. section: Core and Builtins

:class:`dict` (and :class:`collections.UserDict`) objects now support PEP
584's merge (``|``) and update (``|=``) operators. Patch by Brandt Bucher.

..

.. bpo: 32856
.. date: 2018-02-16-10-44-24
.. nonce: UjR8SD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Optimized the idiom for assignment a temporary variable in comprehensions.
Now ``for y in [expr]`` in comprehensions is as fast as a simple assignment
``y = expr``.

..

.. bpo: 30566
.. date: 2020-02-24-03-45-28
.. nonce: qROxty
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`IndexError` when trying to decode an invalid string with punycode
codec.

..

.. bpo: 39649
.. date: 2020-02-23-21-27-10
.. nonce: qiubSp
.. section: Library

Remove obsolete check for ``__args__`` in ``bdb.Bdb.format_stack_entry``.

..

.. bpo: 39648
.. date: 2020-02-22-12-49-04
.. nonce: Y-9N7F
.. section: Library

Expanded :func:`math.gcd` and :func:`math.lcm` to handle multiple arguments.

..

.. bpo: 39681
.. date: 2020-02-21-13-58-40
.. nonce: zN8hf0
.. section: Library

Fix a regression where the C pickle module wouldn't allow unpickling from a
file-like object that doesn't expose a readinto() method.

..

.. bpo: 35950
.. date: 2020-02-21-02-42-41
.. nonce: 9G3-wl
.. section: Library

Raise :exc:`io.UnsupportedOperation` in :meth:`io.BufferedReader.truncate`
when it is called on a read-only :class:`io.BufferedReader` instance.

..

.. bpo: 39479
.. date: 2020-02-18-12-37-16
.. nonce: j3UcCq
.. section: Library

Add :func:`math.lcm` function: least common multiple.

..

.. bpo: 39674
.. date: 2020-02-18-12-31-24
.. nonce: S_zqVM
.. section: Library

Revert "Do not expose abstract collection classes in the collections module"
change (bpo-25988). Aliases to ABC like collections.Mapping are kept in
Python 3.9 to ease transition from Python 2.7, but will be removed in Python
3.10.

..

.. bpo: 39104
.. date: 2020-02-16-18-49-16
.. nonce: cI5MJY
.. section: Library

Fix hanging ProcessPoolExcutor on ``shutdown(wait=False)`` when a task has
failed pickling.

..

.. bpo: 39627
.. date: 2020-02-13-18-14-15
.. nonce: Q0scyQ
.. section: Library

Fixed TypedDict totality check for inherited keys.

..

.. bpo: 39474
.. date: 2020-02-12-12-01-26
.. nonce: RZMEUH
.. section: Library

Fixed starting position of AST for expressions like ``(a)(b)``, ``(a)[b]``
and ``(a).b``.

..

.. bpo: 21016
.. date: 2020-02-12-10-04-39
.. nonce: bFXPH7
.. section: Library

The :mod:`pydoc` and :mod:`trace` modules now use the :mod:`sysconfig`
module to get the path to the Python standard library, to support uncommon
installation path like ``/usr/lib64/python3.9/`` on Fedora. Patch by Jan
Matějek.

..

.. bpo: 39590
.. date: 2020-02-09-05-51-05
.. nonce: rf98GU
.. section: Library

Collections.deque now holds strong references during deque.__contains__ and
deque.count, fixing crashes.

..

.. bpo: 39586
.. date: 2020-02-08-13-37-00
.. nonce: nfTPxX
.. section: Library

The distutils ``bdist_msi`` command is deprecated in Python 3.9, use
``bdist_wheel`` (wheel packages) instead.

..

.. bpo: 39595
.. date: 2020-02-07-23-14-14
.. nonce: DHwddE
.. section: Library

Improved performance of zipfile.Path for files with a large number of
entries. Also improved performance and fixed minor issue as published with
`importlib_metadata 1.5
<https://importlib-metadata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/history.html#v1-5-0>`_.

..

.. bpo: 39350
.. date: 2020-02-06-13-34-52
.. nonce: wRwup1
.. section: Library

Fix regression in :class:`fractions.Fraction` if the numerator and/or the
denominator is an :class:`int` subclass. The :func:`math.gcd` function is
now used to normalize the *numerator* and *denominator*. :func:`math.gcd`
always return a :class:`int` type. Previously, the GCD type depended on
*numerator* and *denominator*.

..

.. bpo: 39567
.. date: 2020-02-06-10-23-32
.. nonce: VpFBxt
.. section: Library

Added audit for :func:`os.walk`, :func:`os.fwalk`, :meth:`pathlib.Path.glob`
and :meth:`pathlib.Path.rglob`.

..

.. bpo: 39559
.. date: 2020-02-05-18-29-14
.. nonce: L8i5YB
.. section: Library

Remove unused, undocumented argument ``getters`` from :func:`uuid.getnode`

..

.. bpo: 38149
.. date: 2020-02-05-11-24-16
.. nonce: GWsjHE
.. section: Library

:func:`sys.audit` is now called only once per call of :func:`glob.glob` and
:func:`glob.iglob`.

..

.. bpo: 39546
.. date: 2020-02-03-15-12-51
.. nonce: _Kj0Pn
.. section: Library

Fix a regression in :class:`~argparse.ArgumentParser` where
``allow_abbrev=False`` was ignored for long options that used a prefix
character other than "-".

..

.. bpo: 39450
.. date: 2020-02-02-14-46-34
.. nonce: 48R274
.. section: Library

Striped whitespace from docstring before returning it from
:func:`unittest.case.shortDescription`.

..

.. bpo: 12915
.. date: 2020-02-02-10-08-25
.. nonce: d6r50-
.. section: Library

A new function ``resolve_name`` has been added to the ``pkgutil`` module.
This resolves a string of the form ``'a.b.c.d'`` or ``'a.b:c.d'`` to an
object. In the example, ``a.b`` is a package/module and ``c.d`` is an object
within that package/module reached via recursive attribute access.

..

.. bpo: 39353
.. date: 2020-01-30-09-07-16
.. nonce: wTl9hc
.. section: Library

The :func:`binascii.crc_hqx` function is no longer deprecated.

..

.. bpo: 39493
.. date: 2020-01-30-01-13-19
.. nonce: CbFRi7
.. section: Library

Mark ``typing.IO.closed`` as a property

..

.. bpo: 39491
.. date: 2020-01-29-22-47-12
.. nonce: tdl17b
.. section: Library

Add :data:`typing.Annotated` and ``include_extras`` parameter to
:func:`typing.get_type_hints` as part of :pep:`593`. Patch by Till
Varoquaux, documentation by Till Varoquaux and Konstantin Kashin.

..

.. bpo: 39485
.. date: 2020-01-29-14-58-27
.. nonce: Zy3ot6
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in :func:`unittest.mock.create_autospec` that would complain about
the wrong number of arguments for custom descriptors defined in an extension
module returning functions.

..

.. bpo: 38932
.. date: 2020-01-25-13-41-27
.. nonce: 1pu_8I
.. section: Library

Mock fully resets child objects on reset_mock(). Patch by Vegard Stikbakke

..

.. bpo: 39082
.. date: 2020-01-24-13-24-35
.. nonce: qKgrq_
.. section: Library

Allow AsyncMock to correctly patch static/class methods

..

.. bpo: 39432
.. date: 2020-01-23-16-08-58
.. nonce: Cee6mi
.. section: Library

Implement PEP-489 algorithm for non-ascii "PyInit\_..." symbol names in
distutils to make it export the correct init symbol also on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 18819
.. date: 2020-01-20-10-06-19
.. nonce: H4qsoS
.. section: Library

Omit ``devmajor`` and ``devminor`` fields for non-device files in
:mod:`tarfile` archives, enabling bit-for-bit compatibility with GNU
``tar(1)``.

..

.. bpo: 39349
.. date: 2020-01-19-04-12-34
.. nonce: 7CV-LC
.. section: Library

Added a new *cancel_futures* parameter to
:meth:`concurrent.futures.Executor.shutdown` that cancels all pending
futures which have not started running, instead of waiting for them to
complete before shutting down the executor.

..

.. bpo: 39274
.. date: 2020-01-15-23-13-03
.. nonce: lpc0-n
.. section: Library

``bool(fraction.Fraction)`` now returns a boolean even if (numerator != 0)
does not return a boolean (ex: numpy number).

..

.. bpo: 34793
.. date: 2019-12-09-17-24-29
.. nonce: D82Dyu
.. section: Library

Remove support for ``with (await asyncio.lock):`` and ``with (yield from
asyncio.lock):``.  The same is correct for ``asyncio.Condition`` and
``asyncio.Semaphore``.

..

.. bpo: 25597
.. date: 2019-09-12-12-11-05
.. nonce: mPMzVx
.. section: Library

Ensure, if ``wraps`` is supplied to :class:`unittest.mock.MagicMock`, it is
used to calculate return values for the magic methods instead of using the
default return values. Patch by Karthikeyan Singaravelan.

..

.. bpo: 36350
.. date: 2019-03-18-16-17-59
.. nonce: udRSWE
.. section: Library

``inspect.Signature.parameters`` and ``inspect.BoundArguments.arguments`` are
now dicts instead of OrderedDicts. Patch contributed by Rémi Lapeyre.

..

.. bpo: 35727
.. date: 2019-01-12-20-39-34
.. nonce: FWrbHn
.. section: Library

Fix sys.exit() and sys.exit(None) exit code propagation when used in
multiprocessing.Process.

..

.. bpo: 32173
.. date: 2017-12-04-10-14-23
.. nonce: e0C5dF
.. section: Library

* Add ``lazycache`` function to ``__all__``.
* Use ``dict.clear`` to clear the cache.
* Refactoring ``getline`` function and ``checkcache`` function.

..

.. bpo: 17422
.. date: 2020-02-19-11-13-47
.. nonce: g7_9zz
.. section: Documentation

The language reference now specifies restrictions on class namespaces.
Adapted from a patch by Ethan Furman.

..

.. bpo: 39572
.. date: 2020-02-18-18-37-07
.. nonce: CCtzy1
.. section: Documentation

Updated documentation of ``total`` flag of ``TypedDict``.

..

.. bpo: 39654
.. date: 2020-02-18-07-42-20
.. nonce: MoT1jI
.. section: Documentation

In pyclbr doc, update 'class' to 'module' where appropriate and add
readmodule comment. Patch by Hakan Çelik.

..

.. bpo: 39153
.. date: 2020-01-27-22-24-51
.. nonce: Pjl8jV
.. section: Documentation

Clarify refcounting semantics for the following functions: -
PyObject_SetItem - PyMapping_SetItemString - PyDict_SetItem -
PyDict_SetItemString

..

.. bpo: 39392
.. date: 2020-01-27-18-18-42
.. nonce: oiqcLO
.. section: Documentation

Explain that when filling with turtle, overlap regions may be left unfilled.

..

.. bpo: 39369
.. date: 2020-01-17-13-59-21
.. nonce: Bx5yE3
.. section: Documentation

Update mmap readline method description. The fact that the readline method
does update the file position should not be ignored since this might give
the impression for the programmer that it doesn't update it.

..

.. bpo: 9056
.. date: 2018-09-28-18-13-08
.. nonce: -sFOwU
.. section: Documentation

Include subsection in TOC for PDF version of docs.

..

.. bpo: 38325
.. date: 2020-02-11-00-38-32
.. nonce: HgmfoE
.. section: Tests

Skip tests on non-BMP characters of test_winconsoleio.

..

.. bpo: 39502
.. date: 2020-01-30-15-04-54
.. nonce: chbpII
.. section: Tests

Skip test_zipfile.test_add_file_after_2107() if :func:`time.localtime` fails
with :exc:`OverflowError`. It is the case on AIX 6.1 for example.

..

.. bpo: 39489
.. date: 2020-01-29-19-17-02
.. nonce: HKPzv-
.. section: Build

Remove ``COUNT_ALLOCS`` special build.

..

.. bpo: 39553
.. date: 2020-02-04-19-50-53
.. nonce: _EnweA
.. section: Windows

Delete unused code related to SxS manifests.

..

.. bpo: 39439
.. date: 2020-01-24-03-15-05
.. nonce: sFxGfR
.. section: Windows

Honor the Python path when a virtualenv is active on Windows.

..

.. bpo: 39393
.. date: 2020-01-20-23-42-53
.. nonce: gWlJDG
.. section: Windows

Improve the error message when attempting to load a DLL with unresolved
dependencies.

..

.. bpo: 38883
.. date: 2020-01-11-22-53-55
.. nonce: X7FRaN
.. section: Windows

:meth:`~pathlib.Path.home()` and :meth:`~pathlib.Path.expanduser()` on
Windows now prefer :envvar:`USERPROFILE` and no longer use :envvar:`HOME`,
which is not normally set for regular user accounts. This makes them again
behave like :func:`os.path.expanduser`, which was changed to ignore
:envvar:`HOME` in 3.8, see :issue:`36264`.

..

.. bpo: 39185
.. date: 2020-01-02-01-11-53
.. nonce: T4herN
.. section: Windows

The build.bat script has additional options for very-quiet output (-q) and
very-verbose output (-vv)

..

.. bpo: 39663
.. date: 2020-02-17-21-09-03
.. nonce: wexcsH
.. section: IDLE

Add tests for pyparse find_good_parse_start().

..

.. bpo: 39600
.. date: 2020-02-10-17-09-48
.. nonce: X6NsyM
.. section: IDLE

In the font configuration window, remove duplicated font names.

..

.. bpo: 30780
.. date: 2020-01-27-16-44-29
.. nonce: nR80qu
.. section: IDLE

Add remaining configdialog tests for buttons and highlights and keys tabs.

..

.. bpo: 39388
.. date: 2020-01-25-02-26-45
.. nonce: x4TQNh
.. section: IDLE

IDLE Settings Cancel button now cancels pending changes

..

.. bpo: 38792
.. date: 2019-11-13-23-51-39
.. nonce: xhTC5a
.. section: IDLE

Close an IDLE shell calltip if a :exc:`KeyboardInterrupt` or shell restart
occurs.  Patch by Zackery Spytz.

..

.. bpo: 35081
.. date: 2020-02-12-21-38-49
.. nonce: 5tj1yC
.. section: C API

Move the ``bytes_methods.h`` header file to the internal C API as
``pycore_bytes_methods.h``: it only contains private symbols (prefixed by
``_Py``), except of the ``PyDoc_STRVAR_shared()`` macro.

..

.. bpo: 35081
.. date: 2020-02-12-21-24-02
.. nonce: at7BjN
.. section: C API

Move the ``dtoa.h`` header file to the internal C API as ``pycore_dtoa.h``:
it only contains private functions (prefixed by ``_Py``). The :mod:`math`
and :mod:`cmath` modules must now be compiled with the ``Py_BUILD_CORE``
macro defined.

..

.. bpo: 39573
.. date: 2020-02-07-10-41-53
.. nonce: EG9VDI
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`Py_SET_SIZE` function to set the size of an object.

..

.. bpo: 39500
.. date: 2020-02-07-09-35-43
.. nonce: xRAEgX
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyUnicode_IsIdentifier` does not call :c:func:`Py_FatalError`
anymore if the string is not ready.

..

.. bpo: 39573
.. date: 2020-02-07-03-39-03
.. nonce: Oa8cL1
.. section: C API

Add :c:func:`Py_SET_TYPE` function to set the type of an object.

..

.. bpo: 39573
.. date: 2020-02-07-00-23-44
.. nonce: nRD1q7
.. section: C API

Add a :c:func:`Py_SET_REFCNT` function to set the reference counter of an
object.

..

.. bpo: 39542
.. date: 2020-02-05-13-14-20
.. nonce: 5mleGX
.. section: C API

Convert :c:func:`PyType_HasFeature`, :c:func:`PyType_Check` and
:c:func:`PyType_CheckExact` macros to static inline functions.

..

.. bpo: 39542
.. date: 2020-02-05-12-40-51
.. nonce: si-_Zq
.. section: C API

In the limited C API, ``PyObject_INIT()`` and ``PyObject_INIT_VAR()`` are
now defined as aliases to :c:func:`PyObject_Init` and
:c:func:`PyObject_InitVar` to make their implementation opaque. It avoids to
leak implementation details in the limited C API. Exclude the following
functions from the limited C API: ``_Py_NewReference()``,
``_Py_ForgetReference()``, ``_PyTraceMalloc_NewReference()`` and
``_Py_GetRefTotal()``.

..

.. bpo: 39542
.. date: 2020-02-05-12-00-18
.. nonce: RJCUKR
.. section: C API

Exclude trashcan mechanism from the limited C API: it requires access to
PyTypeObject and PyThreadState structure fields, whereas these structures
are opaque in the limited C API.

..

.. bpo: 39511
.. date: 2020-01-31-16-35-21
.. nonce: nv9yEn
.. section: C API

The :c:func:`PyThreadState_Clear` function now calls the
:c:member:`PyThreadState.on_delete` callback. Previously, that happened in
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Delete`.

..

.. bpo: 38076
.. date: 2020-01-17-11-37-05
.. nonce: cxfw2x
.. section: C API

Fix to clear the interpreter state only after clearing module globals to
guarantee module state access from C Extensions during runtime destruction

..

.. bpo: 39245
.. date: 2020-01-07-13-46-40
.. nonce: G7wog6
.. section: C API

The Vectorcall API (PEP 590) was made public, adding the functions
``PyObject_Vectorcall``, ``PyObject_VectorcallMethod``,
``PyVectorcall_Function``, ``PyObject_CallOneArg``,
``PyObject_CallMethodNoArgs``, ``PyObject_CallMethodOneArg``,
``PyObject_FastCallDict``, and the flag ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_VECTORCALL``.
