.. bpo: 41780
.. date: 2020-09-15-23-29-49
.. nonce: bOBUIH
.. release date: 2020-09-16
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :meth:`__dir__` of :class:`types.GenericAlias`. Patch by Batuhan
Taskaya.

..

.. bpo: 41690
.. date: 2020-09-02-12-00-57
.. nonce: Ny-Sfy
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a possible stack overflow in the parser when parsing functions and
classes with a huge ammount of arguments. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 41681
.. date: 2020-08-31-17-49-02
.. nonce: 3-VJiH
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes the wrong error description in the error raised by using 2 `,` in
format string in f-string and :meth:`str.format`.

..

.. bpo: 41654
.. date: 2020-08-30-20-38-33
.. nonce: HtnhAM
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash that occurred when destroying subclasses of
:class:`MemoryError`. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 41631
.. date: 2020-08-26-11-23-31
.. nonce: 3jZcd9
.. section: Core and Builtins

The ``_ast`` module uses again a global state. Using a module state per
module instance is causing subtle practical problems. For example, the
Mercurial project replaces the ``__import__()`` function to implement lazy
import, whereas Python expected that ``import _ast`` always return a fully
initialized ``_ast`` module.

..

.. bpo: 41533
.. date: 2020-08-12-20-29-57
.. nonce: 4pcVAc
.. section: Core and Builtins

Free the stack allocated in ``va_build_stack`` if ``do_mkstack`` fails and
the stack is not a ``small_stack``.

..

.. bpo: 41531
.. date: 2020-08-12-19-32-15
.. nonce: WgPzjT
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a bug that was dropping keys when compiling dict literals with more than
0xFFFF elements. Patch by Pablo Galindo.

..

.. bpo: 41525
.. date: 2020-08-12-07-35-07
.. nonce: d9q3XL
.. section: Core and Builtins

The output of ``python --help`` contains now only ASCII characters.

..

.. bpo: 29590
.. date: 2020-05-03-22-26-00
.. nonce: aRz3l7
.. section: Core and Builtins

Make the stack trace correct after calling :meth:`generator.throw` on a
generator that has yielded from a ``yield from``.

..

.. bpo: 41517
.. date: 2020-09-15-22-43-30
.. nonce: sLBH7g
.. section: Library

fix bug allowing Enums to be extended via multiple inheritance

..

.. bpo: 39587
.. date: 2020-09-15-14-56-13
.. nonce: 69xzuh
.. section: Library

use the correct mix-in data type when constructing Enums

..

.. bpo: 41789
.. date: 2020-09-14-19-27-46
.. nonce: pI_uZQ
.. section: Library

Honor `object` overrides in `Enum` class creation (specifically, `__str__`,
`__repr__`, `__format__`, and `__reduce_ex__`).

..

.. bpo: 39651
.. date: 2020-09-11-12-38-55
.. nonce: JMp9l2
.. section: Library

Fix a race condition in the ``call_soon_threadsafe()`` method of
``asyncio.ProactorEventLoop``: do nothing if the self-pipe socket has been
closed.

..

.. bpo: 41720
.. date: 2020-09-04-20-45-38
.. nonce: PW9MzZ
.. section: Library

Fixed :meth:`turtle.Vec2D.__rmul__` for arguments which are not int or
float.

..

.. bpo: 41696
.. date: 2020-09-03-01-35-32
.. nonce: zkYGre
.. section: Library

Fix handling of debug mode in :func:`asyncio.run`. This allows setting
``PYTHONASYNCIODEBUG`` or ``-X dev`` to enable asyncio debug mode when using
:func:`asyncio.run`.

..

.. bpo: 41687
.. date: 2020-09-01-15-57-51
.. nonce: m1b1KA
.. section: Library

Fix implementation of sendfile to be compatible with Solaris.

..

.. bpo: 39010
.. date: 2020-08-30-10-24-26
.. nonce: _mzXJW
.. section: Library

Restarting a ``ProactorEventLoop`` on Windows no longer logs spurious
``ConnectionResetErrors``.

..

.. bpo: 41609
.. date: 2020-08-21-15-51-15
.. nonce: JmiUKG
.. section: Library

The pdb whatis command correctly reports instance methods as 'Method' rather
than 'Function'.

..

.. bpo: 32751
.. date: 2020-08-15-15-50-12
.. nonce: 85je5X
.. section: Library

When cancelling the task due to a timeout, :meth:`asyncio.wait_for` will now
wait until the cancellation is complete also in the case when *timeout* is
<= 0, like it does with positive timeouts.

..

.. bpo: 37658
.. date: 2020-08-15-15-21-40
.. nonce: f9nivB
.. section: Library

:meth:`asyncio.wait_for` now properly handles races between cancellation of
itself and the completion of the wrapped awaitable.

..

.. bpo: 40782
.. date: 2020-08-13-08-07-25
.. nonce: aGZqmB
.. section: Library

Change the method asyncio.AbstractEventLoop.run_in_executor to not be a
coroutine.

..

.. bpo: 41520
.. date: 2020-08-12-13-25-16
.. nonce: BEUWa4
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`codeop` regression that prevented turning compile warnings into
errors.

..

.. bpo: 41503
.. date: 2020-08-07-15-18-16
.. nonce: IYftcu
.. section: Library

Fixed a race between setTarget and flush in logging.handlers.MemoryHandler.

..

.. bpo: 41344
.. date: 2020-07-20-13-27-48
.. nonce: iKipNd
.. section: Library

Prevent creating :class:`shared_memory.SharedMemory` objects with
:code:`size=0`.

..

.. bpo: 41025
.. date: 2020-06-18-10-34-59
.. nonce: elf_nz
.. section: Library

Fixed an issue preventing the C implementation of :class:`zoneinfo.ZoneInfo`
from being subclassed.

..

.. bpo: 31122
.. date: 2020-03-11-07-44-06
.. nonce: zIQ80l
.. section: Library

ssl.wrap_socket() now raises ssl.SSLEOFError rather than OSError when peer
closes connection during TLS negotiation

..

.. bpo: 33660
.. date: 2018-06-12-23-30-41
.. nonce: AdDn5Z
.. section: Library

Fix pathlib.PosixPath to resolve a relative path located on the root
directory properly.

..

.. bpo: 37149
.. date: 2020-09-10-07-48-02
.. nonce: VD0rCv
.. section: Documentation

Change Shipman tkinter doc link from archive.org to TkDocs. (The doc has
been removed from the NMT server.)  The new link responds much faster and
includes a short explanatory note.

..

.. bpo: 41624
.. date: 2020-08-25-15-11-23
.. nonce: ddjJlN
.. section: Documentation

Fix the signature of :class:`typing.Coroutine`.

..

.. bpo: 40204
.. date: 2020-08-12-18-35-40
.. nonce: C8A_pe
.. section: Documentation

Enable Sphinx 3.2 ``c_allow_pre_v3`` option and disable
``c_warn_on_allowed_pre_v3`` option to make the documentation compatible
with Sphinx 2 and Sphinx 3.

..

.. bpo: 40979
.. date: 2020-07-21-15-23-30
.. nonce: pLA8rO
.. section: Documentation

Refactored typing.rst, arranging more than 70 classes, functions, and
decorators into new sub-sections.

..

.. bpo: 39883
.. date: 2020-03-07-03-53-39
.. nonce: 1tnb4-
.. section: Documentation

Make code, examples, and recipes in the Python documentation be licensed
under the more permissive BSD0 license in addition to the existing Python
2.0 license.

..

.. bpo: 41731
.. date: 2020-09-11-19-12-31
.. nonce: Ivxh4U
.. section: Tests

Make test_cmd_line_script pass with option '-vv'.

..

.. bpo: 41617
.. date: 2020-08-24-18-34-01
.. nonce: sKKXz7
.. section: Build

Fix ``pycore_byteswap.h`` header file to support old clang versions:
``__builtin_bswap16()`` is not available in LLVM clang 3.0.

..

.. bpo: 41526
.. date: 2020-08-13-22-40-58
.. nonce: -i2bwb
.. section: Windows

Fixed layout of final page of the installer by removing the special thanks
to Mark Hammond (with his permission).

..

.. bpo: 41524
.. date: 2020-08-12-17-09-06
.. nonce: u6Xfr2
.. section: C API

Fix bug in PyOS_mystrnicmp and PyOS_mystricmp that incremented pointers
beyond the end of a string.
