.. date: 2022-09-28-17-09-37
.. gh-issue: 97616
.. nonce: K1e3Xs
.. release date: 2022-10-11
.. section: Security

Fix multiplying a list by an integer (``list *= int``): detect the integer
overflow when the new allocated length is close to the maximum size. Issue
reported by Jordan Limor.  Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-28-12-10-57
.. gh-issue: 97612
.. nonce: y6NvOQ
.. section: Security

Fix a shell code injection vulnerability in the
``get-remote-certificate.py`` example script. The script no longer uses a
shell to run ``openssl`` commands. Issue reported and initial fix by Caleb
Shortt. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-21-14-38-31
.. gh-issue: 96848
.. nonce: WuoLzU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix command line parsing: reject :option:`-X int_max_str_digits <-X>` option
with no value (invalid) when the :envvar:`PYTHONINTMAXSTRDIGITS` environment
variable is set to a valid limit. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-16-19-02-40
.. gh-issue: 95778
.. nonce: cJmnst
.. section: Core and Builtins

When :exc:`ValueError` is raised if an integer is larger than the limit,
mention the :func:`sys.set_int_max_str_digits` function in the error
message. Patch by Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2022-09-22-14-35-02
.. gh-issue: 97005
.. nonce: yf21Q7
.. section: Library

Update bundled libexpat to 2.4.9

..

.. date: 2022-09-07-00-11-33
.. gh-issue: 96577
.. nonce: kV4K_1
.. section: Windows

Fixes a potential buffer overrun in :mod:`msilib`.

..

.. date: 2022-10-05-15-26-58
.. gh-issue: 97897
.. nonce: Rf-C6u
.. section: macOS

The macOS 13 SDK includes support for the ``mkfifoat`` and ``mknodat``
system calls. Using the ``dir_fd`` option with either :func:`os.mkfifo` or
:func:`os.mknod` could result in a segfault if cpython is built with the
macOS 13 SDK but run on an earlier version of macOS. Prevent this by adding
runtime support for detection of these system calls ("weaklinking") as is
done for other newer syscalls on macOS.
