.. bpo: 38156
.. date: 2020-07-20-17-01-17
.. nonce: ptcdRy
.. release date: 2020-08-11
.. section: Core and Builtins

Handle interrupts that come after EOF correctly in ``PyOS_StdioReadline``.

..

.. bpo: 41497
.. date: 2020-08-07-06-06-29
.. nonce: aBtsWz
.. section: Library

Fix potential UnicodeDecodeError in dis module.

..

.. bpo: 41490
.. date: 2020-08-05-23-16-39
.. nonce: 6z47A_
.. section: Library

Update :mod:`ensurepip` to install pip 20.2.1 and setuptools 49.2.1.

..

.. bpo: 41467
.. date: 2020-08-04-00-20-30
.. nonce: Z8DgTL
.. section: Library

On Windows, fix asyncio ``recv_into()`` return value when the socket/pipe is
closed (:exc:`BrokenPipeError`): return ``0`` rather than an empty byte
string (``b''``).

..

.. bpo: 41425
.. date: 2020-08-03-01-59-48
.. nonce: KJo6zF
.. section: Library

Make tkinter doc example runnable.

..

.. bpo: 41384
.. date: 2020-07-26-21-18-43
.. nonce: MlzIgV
.. section: Library

Raise TclError instead of TypeError when an unknown option is passed to
tkinter.OptionMenu.

..

.. bpo: 38731
.. date: 2020-07-25-23-18-51
.. nonce: Am4wp2
.. section: Library

Fix :exc:`NameError` in command-line interface of :mod:`py_compile`.

..

.. bpo: 41317
.. date: 2020-07-23-01-18-34
.. nonce: O17Z6x
.. section: Library

Use add_done_callback() in asyncio.loop.sock_accept() to unsubscribe reader
early on cancellation.

..

.. bpo: 41364
.. date: 2020-07-21-21-45-55
.. nonce: 5O-k7A
.. section: Library

Reduce import overhead of :mod:`uuid`.

..

.. bpo: 41341
.. date: 2020-07-20-19-13-17
.. nonce: wqrj8C
.. section: Library

Recursive evaluation of `typing.ForwardRef` in `get_type_hints`.

..

.. bpo: 41182
.. date: 2020-07-01-17-33-50
.. nonce: FPFI0N
.. section: Library

selector: use DefaultSelector based upon implementation

..

.. bpo: 40726
.. date: 2020-05-22-12-45-58
.. nonce: 7oBdMw
.. section: Library

Handle cases where the ``end_lineno`` is ``None`` on
:func:`ast.increment_lineno`.

..

.. bpo: 41045
.. date: 2020-07-27-20-46-17
.. nonce: GFF6Ul
.. section: Documentation

Add documentation for debug feature of f-strings.

..

.. bpo: 41314
.. date: 2020-07-25-14-20-00
.. nonce: yrjko0
.. section: Documentation

Changed the release when ``from __future__ import annotations`` becomes the
default from ``4.0`` to ``3.10`` (following a change in PEP 563).

..

.. bpo: 41492
.. date: 2020-08-06-16-59-10
.. nonce: 2FQ9cM
.. section: Windows

Fixes the description that appears in UAC prompts.

..

.. bpo: 40948
.. date: 2020-07-28-12-39-32
.. nonce: ISUFO6
.. section: Windows

Improve post-install message to direct people to the "py" command.

..

.. bpo: 41412
.. date: 2020-07-28-11-55-43
.. nonce: ME20KB
.. section: Windows

The installer will now fail to install on Windows 7 and Windows 8. Further,
the UCRT dependency is now always downloaded on demand.

..

.. bpo: 40741
.. date: 2020-07-20-23-26-26
.. nonce: C9sc_d
.. section: Windows

Update Windows release to include SQLite 3.32.3.

..

.. bpo: 41468
.. date: 2020-08-09-13-42-55
.. nonce: zkP0_Y
.. section: IDLE

Improve IDLE run crash error message (which users should never see).

..

.. bpo: 41373
.. date: 2020-07-24-17-49-58
.. nonce: YQIPu_
.. section: IDLE

Save files loaded with no line ending, as when blank, or different line
endings, by setting its line ending to the system default. Fix regression in
3.8.4 and 3.9.0b4.
