========================
Python on Android README
========================

.. contents::

This document provides a quick overview of the Python build system for Android
on a **linux platform** [1]_.


The ``configure-android`` and ``makesetup`` scripts
===================================================

- The ``configure-android`` script is a wrapper around Python ``configure`` that
  sets variables for the cross-compilation and runs the Python ``configure``
  script. It accepts the same command line arguments as ``configure``.

- The ``Android/makesetup`` script creates a Makefile and accepts the same
  command line arguments as ``configure`` except ``--prefix`` and
  ``--exec-prefix``. The script is meant to be run out of the Python source tree
  (**must be a clean** source tree). One may run ``makesetup`` for multiple
  (api, architecture) tuples in the same directory.

  The Makefile is used to build a Python distribution for an Android device when
  the environment variable ``DEVICE_PREFIXES`` was set at the time the Makefile
  was generated, or to build Python and run it on the Android emulator
  otherwise.

  Depending on whether ``DEVICE_PREFIXES`` was set at the time the Makefile was
  generated, the targets of this Makefile allow to:

  - Cross-compile Python with external libraries.
  - Build a distribution to be copied on an Android device on an existing
    Android application.
  - Run the Python interpreter on the Android emulator using an adb_ shell, the
    interpreter runs with readline enabled.
  - Run a python command on the Android emulator, this may be a command to run
    the Python test suite for example.
  - Start a gdb remote debugging session of a python process running on the
    emulator.


Environment variables
=====================
Both scripts use the following environment variables:

- ``ANDROID_NDK_ROOT``, the location where the Android NDK has been installed.
  The default location is /opt/android-ndk when this variable is not set.
- ``ANDROID_API``, the target API level for the cross-compilation. This is also
  the API level of the emulator AVD [2]_. The default value is 24.
- ``ANDROID_ARCH``, the target architecture for the cross-compilation.  This is
  also the architecture of the AVD. It may be armv7, arm64, x86 or x86_64. See
  `ABI Management`_ for the corresponding ABIs. The default value is x86_64.

The ``WITH_LIBRARIES`` variable is a comma separated list of the external
libraries that are linked with extension modules when the build is done with the
Makefile built by ``makesetup``. This list may include the libffi, ncurses,
openssl, readline or sqlite library. When this environment variable is not set
the readline and ncurses libraries are used. To build Python without any of
those libraries, use ``configure-android`` instead.

When building for a device, the following environment variable is used by
``makesetup``:

- ``DEVICE_PREFIXES`` is specified as <prefix[:exec-prefix]> where <prefix> is
  the directory on Android where the platform independent Python files are
  installed and <exec-prefix> is the directory where the platform dependent
  files are installed. When ``DEVICE_PREFIXES`` is set to a single directory,
  its value replaces both <prefix> and <exec-prefix>.

When building for the emulator, the following environment variables are used by
``makesetup``:

- ``ANDROID_SDK_ROOT``, the location where the Android SDK has been installed.
  The default location is /opt/android-sdk.

- ``EMULATOR_CMD_LINE_OPTIONS``, the emulator command line options (see
  `Start the Emulator from the Command Line`_). Some useful options:

  * ``-use-system-libs``, use the system libstdc++ instead of the version
    bundled with the emulator system. Use it if the emulator does not start.
  * ``-no-window``, run the emulator on a server that has no display.

The Makefiles generated by these two scripts are run according to the values of
these environment variables at the time they have been generated.


Cross-compilation with ``configure-android``
============================================
The ``configure-android`` script is a wrapper around Python ``configure`` that
sets variables for the cross-compilation and runs ``configure``. For example::

    $ ./configure-android --with-pydebug && make

``configure-android`` may be run out of the source tree.

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Android NDK [3]_.
- The cross-compilation of Python requires that a native python program must be
  found in ``$PATH`` on the build platform and that its major.minor version
  matches the version of the source being compiled. Note that this requirement
  does not apply to ``makesetup`` as a native python is built and used by the
  Makefile created by this script.


Build for a device with ``makesetup``
=====================================
Set the ``DEVICE_PREFIXES`` environment variable to the directories where Python
will be installed on the device and run ``makesetup`` to create the Makefile and
to print the name of the distribution directory (DESTDIR) on the build platform,
where the distribution will be installed. Then run ``make dist`` to build this
distribution, that is all.

The remaining part of this section uses the `termux`_ Android application as an
example:

termux initial setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
1. Install `termux`_ and install the ``openssh`` and ``rsync`` termux packages.
2. Connect the device to the linux box through usb tethering and note
   the ip addresses of both endpoints using the ``ip add`` command on termux and
   on linux.
3. Assuming that the ssh server is already running on linux and that the linux
   user public key is ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub, setup ssh and start the ssh server on
   the device with the following commands on termux::

     $ mkdir .ssh
     $ ssh <linux_user>@<linux_ip_address> "cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub" >> .ssh/authorized_keys
     $ chmod 700 .ssh; chmod 600 .ssh/authorized_keys
     $ sshd

   In order to be able to use rsync from linux, add the following lines to
   ~/.ssh/config on linux::

     Host <device_ip_address>
       port 8022

4. Get the values of ``ANDROID_API`` and ``ANDROID_ARCH`` by running the
   following commands on termux::

     $ getprop | grep sdk
     [ro.build.version.sdk]: [22]
     $ getprop | grep abi
     [ro.product.cpu.abi2]: [armeabi]
     [ro.product.cpu.abi]: [armeabi-v7a]
     [ro.product.cpu.abilist32]: [armeabi-v7a,armeabi]
     [ro.product.cpu.abilist64]: []
     [ro.product.cpu.abilist]: [armeabi-v7a,armeabi]

Build and run on termux
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
1. Build the Makefile::

     $ ANDROID_API=22 ANDROID_ARCH=armv7 DEVICE_PREFIXES=/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/local makesetup
     Makefile and Makefile-android-24-armv7 built successfully.
     The distribution directory (DESTDIR) is build/python3.7-install-android-24-armv7

2. Build the distribution with the ``make dist`` command.
3. Copy the distribution to the device::

     $ rsync -av --no-perms --omit-dir-times --keep-dirlinks build/python3.7-install-android-24-armv7/ <device_ip_address>:/

   The copy is done from DESTDIR to the device (note the trailing slash after
   DESTDIR, meaning: "copy  the  contents of this directory" as opposed to "copy
   the directory by name"). The ``--no-perms`` and ``--omit-dir-times`` rsync
   options prevent rsync from attempting (and failing) to change the permissions
   and times of the directories in the /data/data/ path.

4. Run the Python interpreter on termux::

     $ export TERM=linux; export TERMINFO=$HOME/../usr/lib/terminfo
     $ export SYS_EXEC_PREFIX=/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/local
     $ LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$SYS_EXEC_PREFIX/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH $SYS_EXEC_PREFIX/bin/python3

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Android NDK [3]_.
- GNU make, find, xargs, md5sum, awk.
- The native compiler of the build platform to build the native Python.
- wget or curl for downloading the external libraries unless those files are
  downloaded by other means and copied by hand to build/external-libraries.


Build for the emulator with ``makesetup``
=========================================
The ``makesetup`` script creates a Makefile. Running the Makefile requires that
both the NDK and the SDK be installed (see `Installation of the SDK`_).  The
`Makefile targets`_ section below lists the available targets. For example,
to build Python and install it on the emulator::

    $ /path/to/python_src/Android/makesetup --with-pydebug && make install

Another example, testing the socket module::

    $ /path/to/python_src/Android/makesetup && make python PYTHON_ARGS="-m test test_socket"

The first execution of this statement takes quite a while. It creates the
Makefile for the given (api, architecture), as set by the ``$ANDROID_API`` and
``$ANDROID_ARCH`` environment variables, builds a native Python interpreter if
it does not exist yet (used later for the cross-compilation of Python on
Android) and builds the readline and ncurses external libraries for Android. It
then cross-compiles Python for Android, linking extension modules with the
external libraries and builds the zip distributions, creates an AVD, starts the
emulator, installs the Python distribution on the emulator and finally runs the
python command. Note that the Android emulators are very slow except for the x86
and x86_64 architectures when the processor of the build platform is itself of
the x86 family.

The next runs of::

    $ make python PYTHON_ARGS="-m test test_socket"

are much faster. The external libraries do not have to be rebuilt again, the AVD
is already created and if there is no change in the source code then the native
Python and Python on Android do not have to be rebuilt, but all the other steps
enumerated above are run again except the Makefile creation.

Installation of the SDK
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The SDK provides the tools and system images to run the emulator. The emulator
uses a specific AVD for each given (api, architecture) tuple and system images
must be added to the SDK for each one. One may install and manage the SDK with
`Android Studio`_.

The remaining part of this section describes the installation of the SDK and its
management with the ``sdkmanager`` command line tool (i.e. without Android
Studio), through an example that installs the SDK and four system images for
armv7, arm64, x86 and x86_64 at API 24:

- Download the basic Android command line tools by looking for a section named
  *Get just the command line tools* at the end of the `Android Studio`_ page.
  Unzip the downloaded file into the ``$ANDROID_SDK_ROOT`` (possibly not yet
  created) directory::

    $ unzip sdk-tools-linux-xxx.zip -d $ANDROID_SDK_ROOT

  See the `sdkmanager manual`_.

- List the installed packages (with an internet connection this gives also the
  list of available packages)::

    $ $ANDROID_SDK_ROOT/tools/bin/sdkmanager --list

  The package names are truncated in the list output by this command, one must
  add the ``--verbose`` option to the command to get the full package names.

  Substitute ``';'`` in a package name with ``'/'`` to get the relative path to
  ``ANDROID_SDK_ROOT`` where this package is installed.

- Create a file named ``package_file`` that lists the packages to be installed
  and whose content, following our example, is listed below. This file **must
  not** contain **any empty line**::

    build-tools;25.0.3
    platform-tools
    emulator
    platforms;android-24
    system-images;android-24;default;arm64-v8a
    system-images;android-24;default;armeabi-v7a
    system-images;android-24;default;x86
    system-images;android-24;default;x86_64

  A minimun installation consists of the first three packages in this list, plus
  a ``platforms`` package for a given API and a system image in this API.

- Install the packages::

    $ $ANDROID_SDK_ROOT/tools/bin/sdkmanager --verbose --package_file=package_file

- For reference, here is the output of ``sdkmanager --list`` after those
  packages have been installed from scratch in december 2017::

    Installed packages:
      Path                              | Version | Description                    | Location
      -------                           | ------- | -------                        | -------
      build-tools;25.0.3                | 25.0.3  | Android SDK Build-Tools 25.0.3 | build-tools/25.0.3/
      emulator                          | 26.1.4  | Android Emulator               | emulator/
      patcher;v4                        | 1       | SDK Patch Applier v4           | patcher/v4/
      platform-tools                    | 26.0.2  | Android SDK Platform-Tools     | platform-tools/
      platforms;android-24              | 2       | Android SDK Platform 24        | platforms/android-24/
      system-images;a...ult;arm64-v8a   | 7       | ARM 64 v8a System Image        | system-images/android-24/default/arm64-v8a/
      system-images;a...ult;armeabi-v7a | 7       | ARM EABI v7a System Image      | system-images/android-24/default/armeabi-v7a/
      system-images;a...ult;x86         | 8       | Intel x86 Atom System Image    | system-images/android-24/default/x86/
      system-images;a...ult;x86_64      | 8       | Intel x86 Atom_64 System Image | system-images/android-24/default/x86_64/
      tools                             | 26.1.1  | Android SDK Tools              | tools/

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Android NDK [3]_.
- Android SDK (see `Installation of the SDK`_). The SDK with the system images
  of the armv7, arm64, x86 and x86_64 architectures for API 24 requires about
  11 Gb of disk space.
- A Java 8 JRE to run the sdk tools.
- GNU make, find, xargs, zip and unzip.
- The native compiler of the build platform to build the native Python.
- wget or curl for downloading the external libraries unless those files are
  downloaded by other means and copied by hand to build/external-libraries.


Makefile targets
================
Common Makefile targets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
*build*
    Compile the native Python interpreter. Cross-compile the external libraries
    and Python. This is the default target.

*dist*
    When building for a device, this target runs ``make install`` on the Python
    Makefile and Python is installed on DESTDIR.

    When building for the emulator, this target makes a distribution consisting
    of:

    - The machine-specific Python library zip file.
    - The Python standard library zip file.

*distclean*
    Make things clean, before making a distribution. This also removes the
    DESTDIR directory where the external libraries have been copied
    and where the cross-compiled Python has been installed by the command ``make
    DESTDIR=$(PY_DESTDIR) install`` run on Python own Makefile. The external
    libraries will not be rebuilt on the next make invocation.

*clean*
    Remove everything for the given (api, architecture) except the AVD.

Emulator Makefile targets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*install*
    Make a distribution, create the AVD if it does not exist, start the emulator
    and install the content of the two zip files on the emulator. Then start an
    adb_ shell (see the ``adb_shell`` target description below).

    Run ``make distclean install`` to get an install from scratch.

*python*
    Make a distribution, create the AVD if it does not exist, start the
    emulator, install Python and run the python command defined by
    ``PYTHON_ARGS``.  This variable is set on make command line or as an
    environment variable. It must be defined and not empty, to start an
    interactive Python interpreter one must run the ``install``, ``adb_shell``
    or ``emulator`` target instead. Quotes in the command are interpreted both
    by the shell when interpreting the make command line and by make itself, so
    they must be escaped properly such as in this example::

        $ make python PYTHON_ARGS="-c 'print(\\\"Hello world.\\\")'"

*emulator*
    Create the AVD if it does not exist, start the emulator ensuring first that
    there is no other emulator using the same console port and start an adb_
    shell (see the ``adb_shell`` target description below).

    When the AVD is being created, it is not necessary to answer the following
    question printed on the screen at that time::

        Do you wish to create a custom hardware profile? [no]

    Upon the first invocation, python may fail to start with the error ``No
    module named 'encodings'``. In that case, just wait few seconds until
    ``/sdcard`` is mounted and try again.

*kill_emulator*
    Kill the emulator. Useful when the emulator refuses to be shutdown from its
    GUI or when there is no GUI.

*adb_shell*
    Create an adb_ shell on the emulator.

    At the first shell prompt a message is printed giving the shell command to
    run, to source a shell script that sets the environment variables needed to
    run the Python interpreter. The script does:

    - Set ``PATH`` and ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``.
    - Set ``HOME`` to the parent directory of ``sys.exec_prefix``, a writable
      part of Android that is not set as noexec [4]_.
    - Set miscellaneous stuff such as the terminal type, the terminal width and
      the readline inputrc configuration file.
    - Change the current directory to ``$HOME``.

    After sourcing this script one can run the Python interpreter.

*avdclean*
    Remove the AVD. This is the proper way to remove an AVD, do not just remove
    the corresponding directory in the avd/ directory because Android maintains
    also some information on the AVD in  ~/.android/avd.

*gdb*
    Start a gdb remote debugging session of a python process running on the
    emulator. There must be a unique python process running on the emulator.

    This requires that Python 2 is installed on the build platform and that
    ``python2`` is found in the ``$PATH``.

    The debugging session can be customized with the following variables set
    on the command line (or as environment variables) to the value ``yes``
    (for example ``GDB_PYTHON=yes make gdb``):

    - ``GDB_PYTHON=yes``
        Import the `libpython module`_ in gdb and get detailed information of
        the PyObject(s) at the cost of speed.

    - ``GDB_LOGGING=yes``
        Setup logging in gdb and have the output of all the gdb commands also
        redirected to ./gdb.log.

    - ``GDB_SIGILL=yes``
        Work around the problem that gdb fails with SIGILL in
        ``__dl_notify_gdb_of_libraries()`` whenever a library is loaded when
        debugging on the armv7 platforms.


.. [1] A 64-bit linux distribution capable of running 32-bit applications with
   GNU C Library (glibc) 2.19 or later, see the `Android Studio`_ system
   requirements section.

.. [2] Android Virtual Device. This is the image run by the emulator, as such it
   is specific to an (api, architecture) and it holds also the configuration for
   the emulator.

.. [3] android-ndk-r14 is required. The NDK is distributed by Android as a zip
   file at `NDK downloads`_.

   android-ndk-r14 needs 2.8 Gb of disk space.

.. [4] There is no support in Android for creating temporary files and
   directories. Some functions of the Python ``tempfile`` module fall back to
   ``$HOME`` when no directories are available for such creations and this is
   the reason why the script sets the ``HOME`` variable to the parent directory
   of ``sys.exec_prefix``.


.. _termux: https://termux.com/
.. _adb: https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb.html
.. _`libpython module`: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/master/Tools/gdb/libpython.py
.. _`NDK downloads`: https://developer.android.com/ndk/downloads/index.html
.. _`Android Studio`: https://developer.android.com/studio/index.html
.. _`sdkmanager manual`: https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/sdkmanager.html
.. _`Start the Emulator from the Command Line`: https://developer.android.com/studio/run/emulator-commandline.html
.. _`ABI Management`: https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/abis.html

.. vim:filetype=rst:tw=80:ts=4:sw=4:et:
