
****************************
  What's new in Python 3.15
****************************

:Editor: Hugo van Kemenade

.. Rules for maintenance:

   * Anyone can add text to this document.  Do not spend very much time
   on the wording of your changes, because your text will probably
   get rewritten to some degree.

   * The maintainer will go through Misc/NEWS periodically and add
   changes; it's therefore more important to add your changes to
   Misc/NEWS than to this file.

   * This is not a complete list of every single change; completeness
   is the purpose of Misc/NEWS.  Some changes I consider too small
   or esoteric to include.  If such a change is added to the text,
   I'll just remove it.  (This is another reason you shouldn't spend
   too much time on writing your addition.)

   * If you want to draw your new text to the attention of the
   maintainer, add 'XXX' to the beginning of the paragraph or
   section.

   * It's OK to just add a fragmentary note about a change.  For
   example: "XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the
   socket module."  The maintainer will research the change and
   write the necessary text.

   * You can comment out your additions if you like, but it's not
   necessary (especially when a final release is some months away).

   * Credit the author of a patch or bugfix.   Just the name is
   sufficient; the e-mail address isn't necessary.

   * It's helpful to add the issue number as a comment:

   XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the socket
   module.
   (Contributed by P.Y. Developer in :gh:`12345`.)

   This saves the maintainer the effort of going through the VCS log
   when researching a change.

This article explains the new features in Python 3.15, compared to 3.14.

For full details, see the :ref:`changelog <changelog>`.

.. note::

   Prerelease users should be aware that this document is currently in draft
   form. It will be updated substantially as Python 3.15 moves towards release,
   so it's worth checking back even after reading earlier versions.


Summary -- Release highlights
=============================

.. This section singles out the most important changes in Python 3.15.
   Brevity is key.


.. PEP-sized items next.

* :pep:`799`: :ref:`A dedicated profiling package for organizing Python
  profiling tools <whatsnew315-sampling-profiler>`
* :pep:`686`: :ref:`Python now uses UTF-8 as the default encoding
  <whatsnew315-utf8-default>`
* :pep:`782`: :ref:`A new PyBytesWriter C API to create a Python bytes object
  <whatsnew315-pep782>`
* :ref:`Improved error messages <whatsnew315-improved-error-messages>`


New features
============

.. _whatsnew315-sampling-profiler:

:pep:`799`: High frequency statistical sampling profiler
--------------------------------------------------------

A new statistical sampling profiler has been added to the new :mod:`!profiling` module as
:mod:`!profiling.sampling`. This profiler enables low-overhead performance analysis of
running Python processes without requiring code modification or process restart.

Unlike deterministic profilers (:mod:`cProfile` and :mod:`profile`) that instrument
every function call, the sampling profiler periodically captures stack traces from
running processes.  This approach provides virtually zero overhead while achieving
sampling rates of **up to 1,000,000 Hz**, making it the fastest sampling profiler
available for Python (at the time of its contribution) and ideal for debugging
performance issues in production environments.

Key features include:

* **Zero-overhead profiling**: Attach to any running Python process without
  affecting its performance
* **No code modification required**: Profile existing applications without restart
* **Real-time statistics**: Monitor sampling quality during data collection
* **Multiple output formats**: Generate both detailed statistics and flamegraph data
* **Thread-aware profiling**: Option to profile all threads or just the main thread

Profile process 1234 for 10 seconds with default settings:

.. code-block:: shell

  python -m profiling.sampling 1234

Profile with custom interval and duration, save to file:

.. code-block:: shell

  python -m profiling.sampling -i 50 -d 30 -o profile.stats 1234

Generate collapsed stacks for flamegraph:

.. code-block:: shell

  python -m profiling.sampling --collapsed 1234

Profile all threads and sort by total time:

.. code-block:: shell

  python -m profiling.sampling -a --sort-tottime 1234

The profiler generates statistical estimates of where time is spent:

.. code-block:: text

  Real-time sampling stats: Mean: 100261.5Hz (9.97µs) Min: 86333.4Hz (11.58µs) Max: 118807.2Hz (8.42µs) Samples: 400001
  Captured 498841 samples in 5.00 seconds
  Sample rate: 99768.04 samples/sec
  Error rate: 0.72%
  Profile Stats:
        nsamples   sample%   tottime (s)    cumul%   cumtime (s)  filename:lineno(function)
        43/418858       0.0         0.000      87.9         4.189  case.py:667(TestCase.run)
      3293/418812       0.7         0.033      87.9         4.188  case.py:613(TestCase._callTestMethod)
    158562/158562      33.3         1.586      33.3         1.586  test_compile.py:725(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit.<locals>.check_limit)
    129553/129553      27.2         1.296      27.2         1.296  ast.py:46(parse)
        0/128129       0.0         0.000      26.9         1.281  test_ast.py:884(AST_Tests.test_ast_recursion_limit.<locals>.check_limit)
          7/67446       0.0         0.000      14.2         0.674  test_compile.py:729(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)
          6/60380       0.0         0.000      12.7         0.604  test_ast.py:888(AST_Tests.test_ast_recursion_limit)
          3/50020       0.0         0.000      10.5         0.500  test_compile.py:727(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)
          1/38011       0.0         0.000       8.0         0.380  test_ast.py:886(AST_Tests.test_ast_recursion_limit)
          1/25076       0.0         0.000       5.3         0.251  test_compile.py:728(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)
      22361/22362       4.7         0.224       4.7         0.224  test_compile.py:1368(TestSpecifics.test_big_dict_literal)
          4/18008       0.0         0.000       3.8         0.180  test_ast.py:889(AST_Tests.test_ast_recursion_limit)
        11/17696       0.0         0.000       3.7         0.177  subprocess.py:1038(Popen.__init__)
      16968/16968       3.6         0.170       3.6         0.170  subprocess.py:1900(Popen._execute_child)
          2/16941       0.0         0.000       3.6         0.169  test_compile.py:730(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)

  Legend:
    nsamples: Direct/Cumulative samples (direct executing / on call stack)
    sample%: Percentage of total samples this function was directly executing
    tottime: Estimated total time spent directly in this function
    cumul%: Percentage of total samples when this function was on the call stack
    cumtime: Estimated cumulative time (including time in called functions)
    filename:lineno(function): Function location and name

  Summary of Interesting Functions:

  Functions with Highest Direct/Cumulative Ratio (Hot Spots):
    1.000 direct/cumulative ratio, 33.3% direct samples: test_compile.py:(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit.<locals>.check_limit)
    1.000 direct/cumulative ratio, 27.2% direct samples: ast.py:(parse)
    1.000 direct/cumulative ratio, 3.6% direct samples: subprocess.py:(Popen._execute_child)

  Functions with Highest Call Frequency (Indirect Calls):
    418815 indirect calls, 87.9% total stack presence: case.py:(TestCase.run)
    415519 indirect calls, 87.9% total stack presence: case.py:(TestCase._callTestMethod)
    159470 indirect calls, 33.5% total stack presence: test_compile.py:(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)

  Functions with Highest Call Magnification (Cumulative/Direct):
    12267.9x call magnification, 159470 indirect calls from 13 direct: test_compile.py:(TestSpecifics.test_compiler_recursion_limit)
    10581.7x call magnification, 116388 indirect calls from 11 direct: test_ast.py:(AST_Tests.test_ast_recursion_limit)
    9740.9x call magnification, 418815 indirect calls from 43 direct: case.py:(TestCase.run)

The profiler automatically identifies performance bottlenecks through statistical
analysis, highlighting functions with high CPU usage and call frequency patterns.

This capability is particularly valuable for debugging performance issues in
production systems where traditional profiling approaches would be too intrusive.

  .. seealso:: :pep:`799` for further details.

(Contributed by Pablo Galindo and László Kiss Kollár in :gh:`135953`.)


.. _whatsnew315-improved-error-messages:

Improved error messages
-----------------------

* The interpreter now provides more helpful suggestions in :exc:`AttributeError`
  exceptions when accessing an attribute on an object that does not exist, but
  a similar attribute is available through one of its members.

  For example, if the object has an attribute that itself exposes the requested
  name, the error message will suggest accessing it via that inner attribute:

  .. code-block:: python

     @dataclass
     class Circle:
        radius: float

        @property
        def area(self) -> float:
           return pi * self.radius**2

     class Container:
        def __init__(self, inner: Circle) -> None:
           self.inner = inner

     circle = Circle(radius=4.0)
     container = Container(circle)
     print(container.area)

  Running this code now produces a clearer suggestion:

  .. code-block:: pycon

     Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "/home/pablogsal/github/python/main/lel.py", line 42, in <module>
        print(container.area)
              ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
     AttributeError: 'Container' object has no attribute 'area'. Did you mean: 'inner.area'?


Other language changes
======================

.. _whatsnew315-utf8-default:

* Python now uses UTF-8_ as the default encoding, independent of the system's
  environment. This means that I/O operations without an explicit encoding,
  for example, ``open('flying-circus.txt')``, will use UTF-8.
  UTF-8 is a widely-supported Unicode_ character encoding that has become a
  *de facto* standard for representing text, including nearly every webpage
  on the internet, many common file formats, programming languages, and more.

  This only applies when no ``encoding`` argument is given. For best
  compatibility between versions of Python, ensure that an explicit ``encoding``
  argument is always provided. The :ref:`opt-in encoding warning <io-encoding-warning>`
  can be used to identify code that may be affected by this change.
  The special ``encoding='locale'`` argument uses the current locale
  encoding, and has been supported since Python 3.10.

  To retain the previous behaviour, Python's UTF-8 mode may be disabled with
  the :envvar:`PYTHONUTF8=0 <PYTHONUTF8>` environment variable or the
  :option:`-X utf8=0 <-X>` command-line option.

  .. seealso:: :pep:`686` for further details.

  .. _UTF-8: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8
  .. _Unicode: https://home.unicode.org/

  (Contributed by Adam Turner in :gh:`133711`; PEP 686 written by Inada Naoki.)

* Several error messages incorrectly using the term "argument" have been corrected.
  (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`133382`.)

* The interpreter now tries to provide a suggestion when
  :func:`delattr` fails due to a missing attribute.
  When an attribute name that closely resembles an existing attribute is used,
  the interpreter will suggest the correct attribute name in the error message.
  For example:

  .. doctest::

     >>> class A:
     ...     pass
     >>> a = A()
     >>> a.abcde = 1
     >>> del a.abcdf  # doctest: +ELLIPSIS
     Traceback (most recent call last):
     ...
     AttributeError: 'A' object has no attribute 'abcdf'. Did you mean: 'abcde'?

  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev and Pranjal Prajapati in :gh:`136588`.)

* Unraisable exceptions are now highlighted with color by default. This can be
  controlled by :ref:`environment variables <using-on-controlling-color>`.
  (Contributed by Peter Bierma in :gh:`134170`.)

* The :meth:`~object.__repr__` of :class:`ImportError` and :class:`ModuleNotFoundError`
  now shows "name" and "path" as ``name=<name>`` and ``path=<path>`` if they were given
  as keyword arguments at construction time.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka, Oleg Iarygin, and Yoav Nir in :gh:`74185`.)

* The :attr:`~object.__dict__` and :attr:`!__weakref__` descriptors now use a
  single descriptor instance per interpreter, shared across all types that
  need them.
  This speeds up class creation, and helps avoid reference cycles.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin in :gh:`135228`.)

* The :option:`-W` option and the :envvar:`PYTHONWARNINGS` environment variable
  can now specify regular expressions instead of literal strings to match
  the warning message and the module name, if the corresponding field starts
  and ends with a forward slash (``/``).
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`134716`.)

* Functions that take timestamp or timeout arguments now accept any real
  numbers (such as :class:`~decimal.Decimal` and :class:`~fractions.Fraction`),
  not only integers or floats, although this does not improve precision.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`67795`.)

.. _whatsnew315-bytearray-take-bytes:

* Added :meth:`bytearray.take_bytes(n=None, /) <bytearray.take_bytes>` to take
  bytes out of a :class:`bytearray` without copying. This enables optimizing code
  which must return :class:`bytes` after working with a mutable buffer of bytes
  such as data buffering, network protocol parsing, encoding, decoding,
  and compression. Common code patterns which can be optimized with
  :func:`~bytearray.take_bytes` are listed below.

  .. list-table:: Suggested optimizing refactors
      :header-rows: 1

      * - Description
        - Old
        - New

      * - Return :class:`bytes` after working with :class:`bytearray`
        - .. code:: python

              def read() -> bytes:
                  buffer = bytearray(1024)
                  ...
                  return bytes(buffer)

        - .. code:: python

              def read() -> bytes:
                  buffer = bytearray(1024)
                  ...
                  return buffer.take_bytes()

      * - Empty a buffer getting the bytes
        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(1024)
              ...
              data = bytes(buffer)
              buffer.clear()

        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(1024)
              ...
              data = buffer.take_bytes()

      * - Split a buffer at a specific separator
        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(b'abc\ndef')
              n = buffer.find(b'\n')
              data = bytes(buffer[:n + 1])
              del buffer[:n + 1]
              assert data == b'abc'
              assert buffer == bytearray(b'def')

        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(b'abc\ndef')
              n = buffer.find(b'\n')
              data = buffer.take_bytes(n + 1)

      * - Split a buffer at a specific separator; discard after the separator
        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(b'abc\ndef')
              n = buffer.find(b'\n')
              data = bytes(buffer[:n])
              buffer.clear()
              assert data == b'abc'
              assert len(buffer) == 0

        - .. code:: python

              buffer = bytearray(b'abc\ndef')
              n = buffer.find(b'\n')
              buffer.resize(n)
              data = buffer.take_bytes()

  (Contributed by Cody Maloney in :gh:`139871`.)

* Many functions related to compiling or parsing Python code, such as
  :func:`compile`, :func:`ast.parse`, :func:`symtable.symtable`,
  and :func:`importlib.abc.InspectLoader.source_to_code`, now allow the module
  name to be passed. It is needed to unambiguously :ref:`filter <warning-filter>`
  syntax warnings by module name.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`135801`.)

* Allowed defining the *__dict__* and *__weakref__* :ref:`__slots__ <slots>`
  for any class.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`41779`.)


New modules
===========

math.integer
------------

This module provides access to the mathematical functions for integer
arguments (:pep:`791`).
(Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`81313`.)


Improved modules
================

argparse
--------

* The :class:`~argparse.BooleanOptionalAction` action supports now single-dash
  long options and alternate prefix characters.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`138525`.)

* Changed the *suggest_on_error* parameter of :class:`argparse.ArgumentParser` to
  default to ``True``. This enables suggestions for mistyped arguments by default.
  (Contributed by Jakob Schluse in :gh:`140450`.)

calendar
--------

* Calendar pages generated by the :class:`calendar.HTMLCalendar` class now support
  dark mode and have been migrated to the HTML5 standard for improved accessibility.
  (Contributed by Jiahao Li and Hugo van Kemenade in :gh:`137634`.)

* The :mod:`calendar`'s :ref:`command-line <calendar-cli>` HTML output now
  accepts the year-month option: ``python -m calendar -t html 2009 06``.
  (Contributed by Pål Grønås Drange in :gh:`140212`.)


collections
-----------

* Added :meth:`!collections.Counter.__xor__` and
  :meth:`!collections.Counter.__ixor__` to compute the symmetric difference
  between :class:`~collections.Counter` objects.
  (Contributed by Raymond Hettinger in :gh:`138682`.)

collections.abc
---------------

* :class:`collections.abc.ByteString` has been removed from
  ``collections.abc.__all__``. :class:`!collections.abc.ByteString` has been
  deprecated since Python 3.12, and is scheduled for removal in Python 3.17.

* The following statements now cause ``DeprecationWarning``\ s to be emitted at
  runtime:

  * ``from collections.abc import ByteString``
  * ``import collections.abc; collections.abc.ByteString``.

  ``DeprecationWarning``\ s were already emitted if
  :class:`collections.abc.ByteString` was subclassed or used as the second
  argument to :func:`isinstance` or :func:`issubclass`, but warnings were not
  previously emitted if it was merely imported or accessed from the
  :mod:`!collections.abc` module.


concurrent.futures
------------------

* Improved error reporting when a child process in a
  :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` terminates abruptly.
  The resulting traceback will now tell you the PID and exit code of the
  terminated process.
  (Contributed by Jonathan Berg in :gh:`139486`.)


dataclasses
-----------

* Annotations for generated ``__init__`` methods no longer include internal
  type names.


dbm
---

* Added new :meth:`!reorganize` methods to :mod:`dbm.dumb` and :mod:`dbm.sqlite3`
  which allow to recover unused free space previously occupied by deleted entries.
  (Contributed by Andrea Oliveri in :gh:`134004`.)



difflib
-------

  .. _whatsnew315-color-difflib:

* Introduced the optional *color* parameter to :func:`difflib.unified_diff`,
  enabling color output similar to :program:`git diff`.
  This can be controlled by :ref:`environment variables
  <using-on-controlling-color>`.
  (Contributed by Douglas Thor in :gh:`133725`.)

* Improved the styling of HTML diff pages generated by the :class:`difflib.HtmlDiff`
  class, and migrated the output to the HTML5 standard.
  (Contributed by Jiahao Li in :gh:`134580`.)


functools
---------

* :func:`~functools.singledispatchmethod` now supports non-:term:`descriptor`
  callables.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`140873`.)


hashlib
-------

* Ensure that hash functions guaranteed to be always *available* exist as
  attributes of :mod:`hashlib` even if they will not work at runtime due to
  missing backend implementations. For instance, ``hashlib.md5`` will no
  longer raise :exc:`AttributeError` if OpenSSL is not available and Python
  has been built without MD5 support.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`136929`.)


http.client
-----------

* A new *max_response_headers* keyword-only parameter has been added to
  :class:`~http.client.HTTPConnection` and :class:`~http.client.HTTPSConnection`
  constructors. This parameter overrides the default maximum number of allowed
  response headers.
  (Contributed by Alexander Enrique Urieles Nieto in :gh:`131724`.)


http.cookies
------------

* Allow '``"``' double quotes in cookie values.
  (Contributed by Nick Burns and Senthil Kumaran in :gh:`92936`.)


inspect
-------

* Add parameters *inherit_class_doc* and *fallback_to_class_doc*
  for :func:`~inspect.getdoc`.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`132686`.)


locale
------

* :func:`~locale.setlocale` now supports language codes with ``@``-modifiers.
  ``@``-modifiers are no longer silently removed in :func:`~locale.getlocale`,
  but included in the language code.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`137729`.)


math
----

* Add :func:`math.isnormal` and :func:`math.issubnormal` functions.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`132908`.)

* Add :func:`math.fmax`, :func:`math.fmin` and :func:`math.signbit` functions.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`135853`.)


mimetypes
---------

* Add ``application/node`` MIME type for ``.cjs`` extension. (Contributed by John Franey in :gh:`140937`.)
* Add ``application/toml``. (Contributed by Gil Forcada in :gh:`139959`.)
* Rename ``application/x-texinfo`` to ``application/texinfo``.
  (Contributed by Charlie Lin in :gh:`140165`.)
* Changed the MIME type for ``.ai`` files to ``application/pdf``.
  (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`141239`.)


mmap
----

* :class:`mmap.mmap` now has a *trackfd* parameter on Windows;
  if it is ``False``, the file handle corresponding to *fileno* will
  not be duplicated.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`78502`.)


os
--

* Add :func:`os.statx` on Linux kernel versions 4.11 and later with
  glibc versions 2.28 and later.
  (Contributed by Jeffrey Bosboom and Victor Stinner in :gh:`83714`.)


os.path
-------

* Add support of the all-but-last mode in :func:`~os.path.realpath`.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`71189`.)

* The *strict* parameter to :func:`os.path.realpath` accepts a new value,
  :data:`os.path.ALLOW_MISSING`.
  If used, errors other than :exc:`FileNotFoundError` will be re-raised;
  the resulting path can be missing but it will be free of symlinks.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin for :cve:`2025-4517`.)


resource
--------

* Add new constants: :data:`~resource.RLIMIT_NTHR`,
  :data:`~resource.RLIMIT_UMTXP`, :data:`~resource.RLIMIT_THREADS`,
  :data:`~resource.RLIM_SAVED_CUR`, and :data:`~resource.RLIM_SAVED_MAX`.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`137512`.)


shelve
------

* Added new :meth:`!reorganize` method to :mod:`shelve` used to recover unused free
  space previously occupied by deleted entries.
  (Contributed by Andrea Oliveri in :gh:`134004`.)


socket
------

* Add constants for the ISO-TP CAN protocol.
  (Contributed by Patrick Menschel and Stefan Tatschner in :gh:`86819`.)


sqlite3
-------

* The :ref:`command-line interface <sqlite3-cli>` has several new features:

   * SQL keyword completion on <tab>.
     (Contributed by Long Tan in :gh:`133393`.)

   * Prompts, error messages, and help text are now colored.
     This is enabled by default, see :ref:`using-on-controlling-color` for
     details.
     (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych and Łukasz Langa in :gh:`133461`.)

   * Table, index, trigger, view, column, function, and schema completion on <tab>.
     (Contributed by Long Tan in :gh:`136101`.)


ssl
---

* Indicate through :data:`ssl.HAS_PSK_TLS13` whether the :mod:`ssl` module
  supports "External PSKs" in TLSv1.3, as described in RFC 9258.
  (Contributed by Will Childs-Klein in :gh:`133624`.)

* Added new methods for managing groups used for SSL key agreement

   * :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_groups` sets the groups allowed for doing
     key agreement, extending the previous
     :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_ecdh_curve` method.
     This new API provides the ability to list multiple groups and
     supports fixed-field and post-quantum groups in addition to ECDH
     curves. This method can also be used to control what key shares
     are sent in the TLS handshake.
   * :meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.group` returns the group selected for doing key
     agreement on the current connection after the TLS handshake completes.
     This call requires OpenSSL 3.2 or later.
   * :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.get_groups` returns a list of all available key
     agreement groups compatible with the minimum and maximum TLS versions
     currently set in the context. This call requires OpenSSL 3.5 or later.

   (Contributed by Ron Frederick in :gh:`136306`.)

* Added a new method :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_ciphersuites` for setting TLS 1.3
  ciphers. For TLS 1.2 or earlier, :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_ciphers` should
  continue to be used. Both calls can be made on the same context and the
  selected cipher suite will depend on the TLS version negotiated when a
  connection is made.
  (Contributed by Ron Frederick in :gh:`137197`.)

* Added new methods for managing signature algorithms:

  * :func:`ssl.get_sigalgs` returns a list of all available TLS signature
    algorithms. This call requires OpenSSL 3.4 or later.
  * :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_client_sigalgs` sets the signature algorithms
    allowed for certificate-based client authentication.
  * :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.set_server_sigalgs` sets the signature algorithms
    allowed for the server to complete the TLS handshake.
  * :meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.client_sigalg` returns the signature algorithm
    selected for client authentication on the current connection. This call
    requires OpenSSL 3.5 or later.
  * :meth:`ssl.SSLSocket.server_sigalg` returns the signature algorithm
    selected for the server to complete the TLS handshake on the current
    connection. This call requires OpenSSL 3.5 or later.

   (Contributed by Ron Frederick in :gh:`138252`.)


sys
---

* Add :data:`sys.abi_info` namespace to improve access to ABI information.
  (Contributed by Klaus Zimmermann in :gh:`137476`.)


tarfile
-------

* :func:`~tarfile.data_filter` now normalizes symbolic link targets in order to
  avoid path traversal attacks.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin in :gh:`127987` and :cve:`2025-4138`.)
* :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extractall` now skips fixing up directory attributes
  when a directory was removed or replaced by another kind of file.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin in :gh:`127987` and :cve:`2024-12718`.)
* :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extract` and :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extractall`
  now (re-)apply the extraction filter when substituting a link (hard or
  symbolic) with a copy of another archive member, and when fixing up
  directory attributes.
  The former raises a new exception, :exc:`~tarfile.LinkFallbackError`.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin for :cve:`2025-4330` and :cve:`2024-12718`.)
* :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extract` and :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extractall`
  no longer extract rejected members when
  :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.errorlevel` is zero.
  (Contributed by Matt Prodani and Petr Viktorin in :gh:`112887`
  and :cve:`2025-4435`.)
* :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extract` and :func:`~tarfile.TarFile.extractall`
  now replace slashes by backslashes in symlink targets on Windows to prevent
  creation of corrupted links.
  (Contributed by Christoph Walcher in :gh:`57911`.)


timeit
------

* The command-line interface now colorizes error tracebacks
  by default. This can be controlled with
  :ref:`environment variables <using-on-controlling-color>`.
  (Contributed by Yi Hong in :gh:`139374`.)

tkinter
-------

* The :meth:`!tkinter.Text.search` method now supports two additional
  arguments: *nolinestop* which allows the search to
  continue across line boundaries;
  and *strictlimits* which restricts the search to within the specified range.
  (Contributed by Rihaan Meher in :gh:`130848`)

* A new method :meth:`!tkinter.Text.search_all` has been introduced.
  This method allows for searching for all matches of a pattern
  using Tcl's ``-all`` and ``-overlap`` options.
  (Contributed by Rihaan Meher in :gh:`130848`)

types
------

* Expose the write-through :func:`locals` proxy type
  as :data:`types.FrameLocalsProxyType`.
  This represents the type of the :attr:`frame.f_locals` attribute,
  as described in :pep:`667`.


unicodedata
-----------

* The Unicode database has been updated to Unicode 17.0.0.

* Add :func:`unicodedata.isxidstart` and :func:`unicodedata.isxidcontinue`
  functions to check whether a character can start or continue a
  `Unicode Standard Annex #31 <https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/>`_ identifier.
  (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`129117`.)


unittest
--------

* :func:`unittest.TestCase.assertLogs` will now accept a formatter
  to control how messages are formatted.
  (Contributed by Garry Cairns in :gh:`134567`.)


venv
----

* On POSIX platforms, platlib directories will be created if needed when
  creating virtual environments, instead of using ``lib64 -> lib`` symlink.
  This means purelib and platlib of virtual environments no longer share the
  same ``lib`` directory on platforms where :data:`sys.platlibdir` is not
  equal to ``lib``.
  (Contributed by Rui Xi in :gh:`133951`.)


warnings
--------

* Improve filtering by module in :func:`warnings.warn_explicit` if no *module*
  argument is passed.
  It now tests the module regular expression in the warnings filter not only
  against the filename with ``.py`` stripped, but also against module names
  constructed starting from different parent directories of the filename
  (with ``/__init__.py``, ``.py`` and, on Windows, ``.pyw`` stripped).
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`135801`.)


xml.parsers.expat
-----------------

* Add :meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetAllocTrackerActivationThreshold`
  and :meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetAllocTrackerMaximumAmplification`
  to :ref:`xmlparser <xmlparser-objects>` objects to tune protections against
  disproportional amounts of dynamic memory usage from within an Expat parser.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`90949`.)

* Add :meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionActivationThreshold`
  and :meth:`~xml.parsers.expat.xmlparser.SetBillionLaughsAttackProtectionMaximumAmplification`
  to :ref:`xmlparser <xmlparser-objects>` objects to tune protections against
  `billion laughs`_ attacks.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`90949`.)

  .. _billion laughs: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Billion_laughs_attack


zlib
----

* Allow combining two Adler-32 checksums via :func:`~zlib.adler32_combine`.
  (Contributed by Callum Attryde and Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`134635`.)

* Allow combining two CRC-32 checksums via :func:`~zlib.crc32_combine`.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`134635`.)


.. Add improved modules above alphabetically, not here at the end.

Optimizations
=============

csv
---

* :meth:`csv.Sniffer.sniff` delimiter detection is now up to 1.6x faster.
  (Contributed by Maurycy Pawłowski-Wieroński in :gh:`137628`.)


Removed
=======

ctypes
------

* Removed the undocumented function :func:`!ctypes.SetPointerType`,
  which has been deprecated since Python 3.13.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133866`.)


glob
----

* Removed the undocumented :func:`!glob.glob0` and :func:`!glob.glob1`
  functions, which have been deprecated since Python 3.13. Use
  :func:`glob.glob` and pass a directory to its *root_dir* argument instead.
  (Contributed by Barney Gale in :gh:`137466`.)


http.server
-----------

* Removed the :class:`!CGIHTTPRequestHandler` class
  and the ``--cgi`` flag from the :program:`python -m http.server`
  command-line interface. They were deprecated in Python 3.13.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133810`.)


importlib.resources
-------------------

* Removed deprecated ``package`` parameter
  from :func:`importlib.resources.files` function.
  (Contributed by Semyon Moroz in :gh:`138044`)


pathlib
-------

* Removed deprecated :meth:`!pathlib.PurePath.is_reserved`.
  Use :func:`os.path.isreserved` to detect reserved paths on Windows.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`133875`.)


platform
--------

* Removed the :func:`!platform.java_ver` function,
  which was deprecated since Python 3.13.
  (Contributed by Alexey Makridenko in :gh:`133604`.)


sre_*
-----

* Removed :mod:`!sre_compile`, :mod:`!sre_constants` and :mod:`!sre_parse` modules.
  (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`135994`.)


sysconfig
---------

* Removed the *check_home* parameter of :func:`sysconfig.is_python_build`.
  (Contributed by Filipe Laíns in :gh:`92897`.)


threading
---------

* Remove support for arbitrary positional or keyword arguments in the C
  implementation of :class:`~threading.RLock` objects. This was deprecated
  in Python 3.14.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`134087`.)


typing
------

* The undocumented keyword argument syntax for creating
  :class:`~typing.NamedTuple` classes (for example,
  ``Point = NamedTuple("Point", x=int, y=int)``) is no longer supported.
  Use the class-based syntax or the functional syntax instead.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133817`.)

* Using ``TD = TypedDict("TD")`` or ``TD = TypedDict("TD", None)`` to
  construct a :class:`~typing.TypedDict` type with zero fields is no
  longer supported. Use ``class TD(TypedDict): pass``
  or ``TD = TypedDict("TD", {})`` instead.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133823`.)

* Code like ``class ExtraTypeVars(P1[S], Protocol[T, T2]): ...`` now raises
  a :exc:`TypeError`, because ``S`` is not listed in ``Protocol`` parameters.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`137191`.)

* Code like ``class B2(A[T2], Protocol[T1, T2]): ...`` now correctly handles
  type parameters order: it is ``(T1, T2)``, not ``(T2, T1)``
  as it was incorrectly inferred in runtime before.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`137191`.)

* :class:`typing.ByteString` has been removed from ``typing.__all__``.
  :class:`!typing.ByteString` has been deprecated since Python 3.9, and is
  scheduled for removal in Python 3.17.

* The following statements now cause ``DeprecationWarning``\ s to be emitted at
  runtime:

  * ``from typing import ByteString``
  * ``import typing; typing.ByteString``.

  ``DeprecationWarning``\ s were already emitted if :class:`typing.ByteString`
  was subclassed or used as the second argument to :func:`isinstance` or
  :func:`issubclass`, but warnings were not previously emitted if it was merely
  imported or accessed from the :mod:`!typing` module.

* Deprecated :func:`!typing.no_type_check_decorator` has been removed.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`133601`.)


wave
----

* Removed the ``getmark()``, ``setmark()`` and ``getmarkers()`` methods
  of the :class:`~wave.Wave_read` and :class:`~wave.Wave_write` classes,
  which were deprecated since Python 3.13.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133873`.)


zipimport
---------

* Remove deprecated :meth:`!zipimport.zipimporter.load_module`.
  Use :meth:`zipimport.zipimporter.exec_module` instead.
  (Contributed by Jiahao Li in :gh:`133656`.)


Deprecated
==========

New deprecations
----------------

* CLI:

  * Deprecate :option:`-b` and :option:`!-bb` command-line options
    and schedule them to become no-ops in Python 3.17.
    These were primarily helpers for the Python 2 -> 3 transition.
    Starting with Python 3.17, no :exc:`BytesWarning` will be raised
    for these cases; use a type checker instead.

    (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`136355`.)

* :mod:`hashlib`:

  * In hash function constructors such as :func:`~hashlib.new` or the
    direct hash-named constructors such as :func:`~hashlib.md5` and
    :func:`~hashlib.sha256`, the optional initial data parameter could
    also be passed as a keyword argument named ``data=`` or ``string=`` in
    various :mod:`hashlib` implementations.

    Support for the ``string`` keyword argument name is now deprecated and
    is slated for removal in Python 3.19. Prefer passing the initial data as
    a positional argument for maximum backwards compatibility.

    (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`134978`.)

* ``__version__``

  * The ``__version__`` attribute has been deprecated in these standard library
    modules and will be removed in Python 3.20.
    Use :py:data:`sys.version_info` instead.

    - :mod:`argparse`
    - :mod:`csv`
    - :mod:`!ctypes.macholib`
    - :mod:`decimal` (use :data:`decimal.SPEC_VERSION` instead)
    - :mod:`imaplib`
    - :mod:`ipaddress`
    - :mod:`json`
    - :mod:`logging` (``__date__`` also deprecated)
    - :mod:`optparse`
    - :mod:`pickle`
    - :mod:`platform`
    - :mod:`re`
    - :mod:`socketserver`
    - :mod:`tabnanny`
    - :mod:`tkinter.font`
    - :mod:`tkinter.ttk`
    - :mod:`zlib`

    (Contributed by Hugo van Kemenade and Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`76007`.)

.. Add deprecations above alphabetically, not here at the end.

.. include:: ../deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.16.rst

.. include:: ../deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.17.rst

.. include:: ../deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.19.rst

.. include:: ../deprecations/pending-removal-in-3.20.rst

.. include:: ../deprecations/pending-removal-in-future.rst


C API changes
=============

New features
------------

* Add :c:func:`PySys_GetAttr`, :c:func:`PySys_GetAttrString`,
  :c:func:`PySys_GetOptionalAttr`, and :c:func:`PySys_GetOptionalAttrString`
  functions as replacements for :c:func:`PySys_GetObject`.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`108512`.)

* Add :c:type:`PyUnstable_Unicode_GET_CACHED_HASH` to get the cached hash of
  a string. See the documentation for caveats.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin in :gh:`131510`.)

* Add API for checking an extension module's ABI compatibility:
  :c:data:`Py_mod_abi`, :c:func:`PyABIInfo_Check`, :c:macro:`PyABIInfo_VAR`
  and :c:data:`Py_mod_abi`.
  (Contributed by Petr Viktorin in :gh:`137210`.)

.. _whatsnew315-pep782:

* Implement :pep:`782`, the :ref:`PyBytesWriter API <pybyteswriter>`.
  Add functions:

  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Create`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Discard`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_FinishWithPointer`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_FinishWithSize`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Format`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_GetData`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_GetSize`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_GrowAndUpdatePointer`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Grow`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Resize`
  * :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_WriteBytes`

  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`129813`.)

* Add a new :c:func:`PyImport_CreateModuleFromInitfunc` C-API for creating
  a module from a *spec* and *initfunc*.
  (Contributed by Itamar Oren in :gh:`116146`.)

* Add :c:func:`PyTuple_FromArray` to create a :class:`tuple` from an array.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`111489`.)

* Add :c:func:`PyUnstable_Object_Dump` to dump an object to ``stderr``.
  It should only be used for debugging.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`141070`.)

* Add :c:func:`PyUnstable_ThreadState_SetStackProtection` and
  :c:func:`PyUnstable_ThreadState_ResetStackProtection` functions to set
  the stack protection base address and stack protection size of a Python
  thread state.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`139653`.)


Changed C APIs
--------------

* If the :c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_DICT` or :c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_MANAGED_WEAKREF`
  flag is set then :c:macro:`Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_GC` must be set too.
  (Contributed by Sergey Miryanov in :gh:`134786`)


Porting to Python 3.15
----------------------

* Private functions promoted to public C APIs:

  The |pythoncapi_compat_project| can be used to get most of these new
  functions on Python 3.14 and older.


Removed C APIs
--------------

* Remove deprecated ``PyUnicode`` functions:

  * :c:func:`!PyUnicode_AsDecodedObject`:
    Use :c:func:`PyCodec_Decode` instead.
  * :c:func:`!PyUnicode_AsDecodedUnicode`:
    Use :c:func:`PyCodec_Decode` instead; Note that some codecs (for example, "base64")
    may return a type other than :class:`str`, such as :class:`bytes`.
  * :c:func:`!PyUnicode_AsEncodedObject`:
    Use :c:func:`PyCodec_Encode` instead.
  * :c:func:`!PyUnicode_AsEncodedUnicode`:
    Use :c:func:`PyCodec_Encode` instead; Note that some codecs (for example, "base64")
    may return a type other than :class:`bytes`, such as :class:`str`.

  (Contributed by Stan Ulbrych in :gh:`133612`.)

* :c:func:`!PyImport_ImportModuleNoBlock`: deprecated alias
  of :c:func:`PyImport_ImportModule`.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133644`.)

* :c:func:`!PyWeakref_GetObject` and :c:macro:`!PyWeakref_GET_OBJECT`:
  use :c:func:`PyWeakref_GetRef` instead. The |pythoncapi_compat_project|
  can be used to get :c:func:`!PyWeakref_GetRef` on Python 3.12 and older.
  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133644`.)

* Remove deprecated :c:func:`!PySys_ResetWarnOptions`.
  Clear :data:`sys.warnoptions` and :data:`!warnings.filters` instead.

  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`138886`.)

The following functions are removed in favor of :c:func:`PyConfig_Get`.
The |pythoncapi_compat_project| can be used to get :c:func:`!PyConfig_Get`
on Python 3.13 and older.

* Python initialization functions:

  * :c:func:`!Py_GetExecPrefix`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("base_exec_prefix") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.base_exec_prefix`) instead.
    Use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("exec_prefix") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.exec_prefix`) if :ref:`virtual environments <venv-def>`
    need to be handled.
  * :c:func:`!Py_GetPath`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("module_search_paths") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.path`) instead.
  * :c:func:`!Py_GetPrefix`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("base_prefix") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.base_prefix`) instead.
    Use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("prefix") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.prefix`) if :ref:`virtual environments <venv-def>`
    need to be handled.
  * :c:func:`!Py_GetProgramFullPath`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("executable") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.executable`) instead.
  * :c:func:`!Py_GetProgramName`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("executable") <PyConfig_Get>`
    (:data:`sys.executable`) instead.
  * :c:func:`!Py_GetPythonHome`:
    use :c:func:`PyConfig_Get("home") <PyConfig_Get>` or the
    :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` environment variable instead.

  (Contributed by Bénédikt Tran in :gh:`133644`.)

.. |pythoncapi_compat_project| replace:: |pythoncapi_compat_project_link|_
.. |pythoncapi_compat_project_link| replace:: pythoncapi-compat project
.. _pythoncapi_compat_project_link: https://github.com/python/pythoncapi-compat


Deprecated C APIs
-----------------

* For unsigned integer formats in :c:func:`PyArg_ParseTuple`,
  accepting Python integers with value that is larger than the maximal value
  for the C type or less than the minimal value for the corresponding
  signed integer type of the same size is now deprecated.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`132629`.)

* :c:func:`PyBytes_FromStringAndSize(NULL, len) <PyBytes_FromStringAndSize>`
  and :c:func:`_PyBytes_Resize` are :term:`soft deprecated`,
  use the :c:type:`PyBytesWriter` API instead.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`129813`.)

* Deprecate :c:member:`~PyComplexObject.cval` field of the
  :c:type:`PyComplexObject` type.
  Use :c:func:`PyComplex_AsCComplex` and :c:func:`PyComplex_FromCComplex`
  to convert a Python complex number to/from the C :c:type:`Py_complex`
  representation.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`128813`.)

* Functions :c:func:`_Py_c_sum`, :c:func:`_Py_c_diff`, :c:func:`_Py_c_neg`,
  :c:func:`_Py_c_prod`, :c:func:`_Py_c_quot`, :c:func:`_Py_c_pow` and
  :c:func:`_Py_c_abs` are :term:`soft deprecated`.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`128813`.)

* :c:member:`~PyConfig.bytes_warning` is deprecated
  since 3.15 and will be removed in 3.17.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`136355`.)

* :c:macro:`!Py_INFINITY` macro is :term:`soft deprecated`,
  use the C11 standard ``<math.h>`` :c:macro:`!INFINITY` instead.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`141004`.)

* :c:macro:`!Py_MATH_El` and :c:macro:`!Py_MATH_PIl` are deprecated
  since 3.15 and will be removed in 3.20.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`141004`.)


.. Add C API deprecations above alphabetically, not here at the end.


Build changes
=============

* Removed implicit fallback to the bundled copy of the ``libmpdec`` library.
  Now this should be explicitly enabled with :option:`--with-system-libmpdec`
  set to ``no`` or with :option:`!--without-system-libmpdec`.
  (Contributed by Sergey B Kirpichev in :gh:`115119`.)


Porting to Python 3.15
======================

This section lists previously described changes and other bugfixes
that may require changes to your code.

* :class:`sqlite3.Connection` APIs have been cleaned up.

  * All parameters of :func:`sqlite3.connect` except *database* are now keyword-only.
  * The first three parameters of methods :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.create_function`
    and :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.create_aggregate` are now positional-only.
  * The first parameter of methods :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_authorizer`,
    :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_progress_handler` and
    :meth:`~sqlite3.Connection.set_trace_callback` is now positional-only.

  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`133595`.)

* :data:`resource.RLIM_INFINITY` is now always positive.
  Passing a negative integer value that corresponded to its old value
  (such as ``-1`` or ``-3``, depending on platform) to
  :func:`resource.setrlimit` and :func:`resource.prlimit` is now deprecated.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`137044`.)

* :meth:`~mmap.mmap.resize` has been removed on platforms that don't support the
  underlying syscall, instead of raising a :exc:`SystemError`.

* A resource warning is now emitted for an unclosed
  :func:`xml.etree.ElementTree.iterparse` iterator if it opened a file.
  Use its :meth:`!close` method or the :func:`contextlib.closing` context
  manager to close it.
  (Contributed by Osama Abdelkader and Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`140601`.)

* If a short option and a single-dash long option are passed to
  :meth:`argparse.ArgumentParser.add_argument`, *dest* is now inferred from
  the single-dash long option. For example, in ``add_argument('-f', '-foo')``,
  *dest* is now ``'foo'`` instead of ``'f'``.
  Pass an explicit *dest* argument to preserve the old behavior.
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka in :gh:`138697`.)
