Doc/library/cmd.rst, before:

:mod:`!cmd` --- Support for line-oriented command interpreters
==============================================================

.. module:: cmd
   :synopsis: Build line-oriented command interpreters.

.. sectionauthor:: Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/cmd.py`

--------------

The :class:`Cmd` class provides a simple framework for writing line-oriented
command interpreters.  These are often useful for test harnesses, administrative
tools, and prototypes that will later be wrapped in a more sophisticated
interface.

.. class:: Cmd(completekey='tab', stdin=None, stdout=None)

   A :class:`Cmd` instance or subclass instance is a line-oriented interpreter
   framework.  There is no good reason to instantiate :class:`Cmd` itself; rather,
   it's useful as a superclass of an interpreter class you define yourself in order
   to inherit :class:`Cmd`'s methods and encapsulate action methods.

   The optional argument *completekey* is the :mod:`readline` name of a completion
   key; it defaults to :kbd:`Tab`. If *completekey* is not :const:`None` and
   :mod:`readline` is available, command completion is done automatically.

   The default, ``'tab'``, is treated specially, so that it refers to the
   :kbd:`Tab` key on every :data:`readline.backend`.
   Specifically, if :data:`readline.backend` is ``editline``,
   ``Cmd`` will use ``'^I'`` instead of ``'tab'``.
   Note that other values are not treated this way, and might only work
   with a specific backend.

   The optional arguments *stdin* and *stdout* specify the  input and output file
   objects that the Cmd instance or subclass  instance will use for input and
   output. If not specified, they will default to :data:`sys.stdin` and
   :data:`sys.stdout`.

   If you want a given *stdin* to be used, make sure to set the instance's
   :attr:`use_rawinput` attribute to ``False``, otherwise *stdin* will be
   ignored.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.13
      ``completekey='tab'`` is replaced by ``'^I'`` for ``editline``.


.. _cmd-objects:

Cmd Objects
-----------

A :class:`Cmd` instance has the following methods:


.. method:: Cmd.cmdloop(intro=None)

   Repeatedly issue a prompt, accept input, parse an initial prefix off the
   received input, and dispatch to action methods, passing them the remainder of
   the line as argument.

   The optional argument is a banner or intro string to be issued before the first
   prompt (this overrides the :attr:`intro` class attribute).

   If the :mod:`readline` module is loaded, input will automatically inherit
   :program:`bash`\ -like history-list editing (e.g. :kbd:`Control-P` scrolls back
   to the last command, :kbd:`Control-N` forward to the next one, :kbd:`Control-F`
   moves the cursor to the right non-destructively, :kbd:`Control-B` moves the
   cursor to the left non-destructively, etc.).

   An end-of-file on input is passed back as the string ``'EOF'``.

   .. index::
      single: ? (question mark); in a command interpreter
      single: ! (exclamation); in a command interpreter

   An interpreter instance will recognize a command name ``foo`` if and only if it
   has a method :meth:`!do_foo`.  As a special case, a line beginning with the
   character ``'?'`` is dispatched to the method :meth:`do_help`.  As another
   special case, a line beginning with the character ``'!'`` is dispatched to the
   method :meth:`!do_shell` (if such a method is defined).

   This method will return when the :meth:`postcmd` method returns a true value.
   The *stop* argument to :meth:`postcmd` is the return value from the command's
   corresponding :meth:`!do_\*` method.

   If completion is enabled, completing commands will be done automatically, and
   completing of commands args is done by calling :meth:`!complete_foo` with
   arguments *text*, *line*, *begidx*, and *endidx*.  *text* is the string prefix
   we are attempting to match: all returned matches must begin with it. *line* is
   the current input line with leading whitespace removed, *begidx* and *endidx*
   are the beginning and ending indexes of the prefix text, which could be used to
   provide different completion depending upon which position the argument is in.


.. method:: Cmd.do_help(arg)

   All subclasses of :class:`Cmd` inherit a predefined :meth:`!do_help`.  This
   method, called with an argument ``'bar'``, invokes the corresponding method
   :meth:`!help_bar`, and if that is not present, prints the docstring of
   :meth:`!do_bar`, if available.  With no argument, :meth:`!do_help` lists all
   available help topics (that is, all commands with corresponding
   :meth:`!help_\*` methods or commands that have docstrings), and also lists any
   undocumented commands.


.. method:: Cmd.onecmd(str)

   Interpret the argument as though it had been typed in response to the prompt.
   This may be overridden, but should not normally need to be; see the
   :meth:`precmd` and :meth:`postcmd` methods for useful execution hooks.  The
   return value is a flag indicating whether interpretation of commands by the
   interpreter should stop.  If there is a :meth:`!do_\*` method for the command
   *str*, the return value of that method is returned, otherwise the return value
   from the :meth:`default` method is returned.


.. method:: Cmd.emptyline()

   Method called when an empty line is entered in response to the prompt. If this
   method is not overridden, it repeats the last nonempty command entered.


.. method:: Cmd.default(line)

   Method called on an input line when the command prefix is not recognized. If
   this method is not overridden, it prints an error message and returns.


.. method:: Cmd.completedefault(text, line, begidx, endidx)

   Method called to complete an input line when no command-specific
   :meth:`!complete_\*` method is available.  By default, it returns an empty list.


.. method:: Cmd.columnize(list, displaywidth=80)

   Method called to display a list of strings as a compact set of columns.
   Each column is only as wide as necessary.
   Columns are separated by two spaces for readability.


.. method:: Cmd.precmd(line)

   Hook method executed just before the command line *line* is interpreted, but
   after the input prompt is generated and issued.  This method is a stub in
   :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.  The return value is
   used as the command which will be executed by the :meth:`onecmd` method; the
   :meth:`precmd` implementation may re-write the command or simply return *line*
   unchanged.


.. method:: Cmd.postcmd(stop, line)

   Hook method executed just after a command dispatch is finished.  This method is
   a stub in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.  *line* is the
   command line which was executed, and *stop* is a flag which indicates whether
   execution will be terminated after the call to :meth:`postcmd`; this will be the
   return value of the :meth:`onecmd` method.  The return value of this method will
   be used as the new value for the internal flag which corresponds to *stop*;
   returning false will cause interpretation to continue.


.. method:: Cmd.preloop()

   Hook method executed once when :meth:`cmdloop` is called.  This method is a stub
   in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.


.. method:: Cmd.postloop()

   Hook method executed once when :meth:`cmdloop` is about to return. This method
   is a stub in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.


Instances of :class:`Cmd` subclasses have some public instance variables:

.. attribute:: Cmd.prompt

   The prompt issued to solicit input.


.. attribute:: Cmd.identchars

   The string of characters accepted for the command prefix.


.. attribute:: Cmd.lastcmd

   The last nonempty command prefix seen.


.. attribute:: Cmd.cmdqueue

   A list of queued input lines.  The cmdqueue list is checked in
   :meth:`cmdloop` when new input is needed; if it is nonempty, its elements
   will be processed in order, as if entered at the prompt.


.. attribute:: Cmd.intro

   A string to issue as an intro or banner.  May be overridden by giving the
   :meth:`cmdloop` method an argument.


.. attribute:: Cmd.doc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for documented commands.


.. attribute:: Cmd.misc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for miscellaneous  help
   topics (that is, there are :meth:`!help_\*` methods without corresponding
   :meth:`!do_\*` methods).


.. attribute:: Cmd.undoc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for undocumented  commands
   (that is, there are :meth:`!do_\*` methods without corresponding :meth:`!help_\*`
   methods).


.. attribute:: Cmd.ruler

   The character used to draw separator lines under the help-message headers.  If
   empty, no ruler line is drawn.  It defaults to ``'='``.


.. attribute:: Cmd.use_rawinput

   A flag, defaulting to true.  If true, :meth:`cmdloop` uses :func:`input` to
   display a prompt and read the next command; if false, :data:`sys.stdout.write() <sys.stdout>`
   and :data:`sys.stdin.readline() <sys.stdin>` are used. (This means that by importing
   :mod:`readline`, on systems that support it, the interpreter will automatically
   support :program:`Emacs`\ -like line editing  and command-history keystrokes.)


.. _cmd-example:

Cmd Example
-----------

.. sectionauthor:: Raymond Hettinger <python at rcn dot com>

The :mod:`cmd` module is mainly useful for building custom shells that let a
user work with a program interactively.

This section presents a simple example of how to build a shell around a few of
the commands in the :mod:`turtle` module.

Basic turtle commands such as :meth:`~turtle.forward` are added to a
:class:`Cmd` subclass with method named :meth:`!do_forward`.  The argument is
converted to a number and dispatched to the turtle module.  The docstring is
used in the help utility provided by the shell.

The example also includes a basic record and playback facility implemented with
the :meth:`~Cmd.precmd` method which is responsible for converting the input to
lowercase and writing the commands to a file.  The :meth:`!do_playback` method
reads the file and adds the recorded commands to the :attr:`~Cmd.cmdqueue` for
immediate playback::

    import cmd, sys
    from turtle import *

    class TurtleShell(cmd.Cmd):
        intro = 'Welcome to the turtle shell.   Type help or ? to list commands.\n'
        prompt = '(turtle) '
        file = None

        # ----- basic turtle commands -----
        def do_forward(self, arg):
            'Move the turtle forward by the specified distance:  FORWARD 10'
            forward(*parse(arg))
        def do_right(self, arg):
            'Turn turtle right by given number of degrees:  RIGHT 20'
            right(*parse(arg))
        def do_left(self, arg):
            'Turn turtle left by given number of degrees:  LEFT 90'
            left(*parse(arg))
        def do_goto(self, arg):
            'Move turtle to an absolute position with changing orientation.  GOTO 100 200'
            goto(*parse(arg))
        def do_home(self, arg):
            'Return turtle to the home position:  HOME'
            home()
        def do_circle(self, arg):
            'Draw circle with given radius an options extent and steps:  CIRCLE 50'
            circle(*parse(arg))
        def do_position(self, arg):
            'Print the current turtle position:  POSITION'
            print('Current position is %d %d\n' % position())
        def do_heading(self, arg):
            'Print the current turtle heading in degrees:  HEADING'
            print('Current heading is %d\n' % (heading(),))
        def do_color(self, arg):
            'Set the color:  COLOR BLUE'
            color(arg.lower())
        def do_undo(self, arg):
            'Undo (repeatedly) the last turtle action(s):  UNDO'
        def do_reset(self, arg):
            'Clear the screen and return turtle to center:  RESET'
            reset()
        def do_bye(self, arg):
            'Stop recording, close the turtle window, and exit:  BYE'
            print('Thank you for using Turtle')
            self.close()
            bye()
            return True

        # ----- record and playback -----
        def do_record(self, arg):
            'Save future commands to filename:  RECORD rose.cmd'
            self.file = open(arg, 'w')
        def do_playback(self, arg):
            'Playback commands from a file:  PLAYBACK rose.cmd'
            self.close()
            with open(arg) as f:
                self.cmdqueue.extend(f.read().splitlines())
        def precmd(self, line):
            line = line.lower()
            if self.file and 'playback' not in line:
                print(line, file=self.file)
            return line
        def close(self):
            if self.file:
                self.file.close()
                self.file = None

    def parse(arg):
        'Convert a series of zero or more numbers to an argument tuple'
        return tuple(map(int, arg.split()))

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        TurtleShell().cmdloop()


Here is a sample session with the turtle shell showing the help functions, using
blank lines to repeat commands, and the simple record and playback facility:

.. code-block:: none

    Welcome to the turtle shell.   Type help or ? to list commands.

    (turtle) ?

    Documented commands (type help <topic>):
    ========================================
    bye     color    goto     home  playback  record  right
    circle  forward  heading  left  position  reset   undo

    (turtle) help forward
    Move the turtle forward by the specified distance:  FORWARD 10
    (turtle) record spiral.cmd
    (turtle) position
    Current position is 0 0

    (turtle) heading
    Current heading is 0

    (turtle) reset
    (turtle) circle 20
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 40
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 60
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 80
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 100
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 120
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 120
    (turtle) heading
    Current heading is 180

    (turtle) forward 100
    (turtle)
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 100
    (turtle)
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 400
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 500
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 400
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 300
    (turtle) playback spiral.cmd
    Current position is 0 0

    Current heading is 0

    Current heading is 180

    (turtle) bye
    Thank you for using Turtle

Commit message:

docs(cmd): highlight default empty-line command repetition

Doc/library/cmd.rst, after:

:mod:`!cmd` --- Support for line-oriented command interpreters
==============================================================

.. module:: cmd
   :synopsis: Build line-oriented command interpreters.

.. sectionauthor:: Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/cmd.py`

--------------

The :class:`Cmd` class provides a simple framework for writing line-oriented
command interpreters.  These are often useful for test harnesses, administrative
tools, and prototypes that will later be wrapped in a more sophisticated
interface.

.. class:: Cmd(completekey='tab', stdin=None, stdout=None)

   A :class:`Cmd` instance or subclass instance is a line-oriented interpreter
   framework.  There is no good reason to instantiate :class:`Cmd` itself; rather,
   it's useful as a superclass of an interpreter class you define yourself in order
   to inherit :class:`Cmd`'s methods and encapsulate action methods.

   The optional argument *completekey* is the :mod:`readline` name of a completion
   key; it defaults to :kbd:`Tab`. If *completekey* is not :const:`None` and
   :mod:`readline` is available, command completion is done automatically.

   The default, ``'tab'``, is treated specially, so that it refers to the
   :kbd:`Tab` key on every :data:`readline.backend`.
   Specifically, if :data:`readline.backend` is ``editline``,
   ``Cmd`` will use ``'^I'`` instead of ``'tab'``.
   Note that other values are not treated this way, and might only work
   with a specific backend.

   The optional arguments *stdin* and *stdout* specify the  input and output file
   objects that the Cmd instance or subclass  instance will use for input and
   output. If not specified, they will default to :data:`sys.stdin` and
   :data:`sys.stdout`.

   If you want a given *stdin* to be used, make sure to set the instance's
   :attr:`use_rawinput` attribute to ``False``, otherwise *stdin* will be
   ignored.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.13
      ``completekey='tab'`` is replaced by ``'^I'`` for ``editline``.


.. _cmd-objects:

Cmd Objects
-----------

A :class:`Cmd` instance has the following methods:


.. method:: Cmd.cmdloop(intro=None)

   Repeatedly issue a prompt, accept input, parse an initial prefix off the
   received input, and dispatch to action methods, passing them the remainder of
   the line as argument.

   The optional argument is a banner or intro string to be issued before the first
   prompt (this overrides the :attr:`intro` class attribute).

   If the :mod:`readline` module is loaded, input will automatically inherit
   :program:`bash`\ -like history-list editing (e.g. :kbd:`Control-P` scrolls back
   to the last command, :kbd:`Control-N` forward to the next one, :kbd:`Control-F`
   moves the cursor to the right non-destructively, :kbd:`Control-B` moves the
   cursor to the left non-destructively, etc.).

   An end-of-file on input is passed back as the string ``'EOF'``.

   .. index::
      single: ? (question mark); in a command interpreter
      single: ! (exclamation); in a command interpreter

   An interpreter instance will recognize a command name ``foo`` if and only if it
   has a method :meth:`!do_foo`.  As a special case, a line beginning with the
   character ``'?'`` is dispatched to the method :meth:`do_help`.  As another
   special case, a line beginning with the character ``'!'`` is dispatched to the
   method :meth:`!do_shell` (if such a method is defined).

   This method will return when the :meth:`postcmd` method returns a true value.
   The *stop* argument to :meth:`postcmd` is the return value from the command's
   corresponding :meth:`!do_\*` method.

   If completion is enabled, completing commands will be done automatically, and
   completing of commands args is done by calling :meth:`!complete_foo` with
   arguments *text*, *line*, *begidx*, and *endidx*.  *text* is the string prefix
   we are attempting to match: all returned matches must begin with it. *line* is
   the current input line with leading whitespace removed, *begidx* and *endidx*
   are the beginning and ending indexes of the prefix text, which could be used to
   provide different completion depending upon which position the argument is in.

.. rubric:: Empty input behavior

When the user enters an empty line in response to the prompt, ``Cmd`` does
**not** ignore the input by default. Instead, it repeats the last non-empty
command entered.

This behavior is implemented by :meth:`Cmd.emptyline`. Subclasses that do not
want empty input to repeat the previous command  should override
:meth:`Cmd.emptyline` to do nothing::

   def emptyline(self):
       pass

.. method:: Cmd.do_help(arg)

   All subclasses of :class:`Cmd` inherit a predefined :meth:`!do_help`.  This
   method, called with an argument ``'bar'``, invokes the corresponding method
   :meth:`!help_bar`, and if that is not present, prints the docstring of
   :meth:`!do_bar`, if available.  With no argument, :meth:`!do_help` lists all
   available help topics (that is, all commands with corresponding
   :meth:`!help_\*` methods or commands that have docstrings), and also lists any
   undocumented commands.


.. method:: Cmd.onecmd(str)

   Interpret the argument as though it had been typed in response to the prompt.
   This may be overridden, but should not normally need to be; see the
   :meth:`precmd` and :meth:`postcmd` methods for useful execution hooks.  The
   return value is a flag indicating whether interpretation of commands by the
   interpreter should stop.  If there is a :meth:`!do_\*` method for the command
   *str*, the return value of that method is returned, otherwise the return value
   from the :meth:`default` method is returned.


.. method:: Cmd.emptyline()

   Method called when an empty line is entered in response to the prompt. If this
   method is not overridden, it repeats the last nonempty command entered.


.. method:: Cmd.default(line)

   Method called on an input line when the command prefix is not recognized. If
   this method is not overridden, it prints an error message and returns.


.. method:: Cmd.completedefault(text, line, begidx, endidx)

   Method called to complete an input line when no command-specific
   :meth:`!complete_\*` method is available.  By default, it returns an empty list.


.. method:: Cmd.columnize(list, displaywidth=80)

   Method called to display a list of strings as a compact set of columns.
   Each column is only as wide as necessary.
   Columns are separated by two spaces for readability.


.. method:: Cmd.precmd(line)

   Hook method executed just before the command line *line* is interpreted, but
   after the input prompt is generated and issued.  This method is a stub in
   :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.  The return value is
   used as the command which will be executed by the :meth:`onecmd` method; the
   :meth:`precmd` implementation may re-write the command or simply return *line*
   unchanged.


.. method:: Cmd.postcmd(stop, line)

   Hook method executed just after a command dispatch is finished.  This method is
   a stub in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.  *line* is the
   command line which was executed, and *stop* is a flag which indicates whether
   execution will be terminated after the call to :meth:`postcmd`; this will be the
   return value of the :meth:`onecmd` method.  The return value of this method will
   be used as the new value for the internal flag which corresponds to *stop*;
   returning false will cause interpretation to continue.


.. method:: Cmd.preloop()

   Hook method executed once when :meth:`cmdloop` is called.  This method is a stub
   in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.


.. method:: Cmd.postloop()

   Hook method executed once when :meth:`cmdloop` is about to return. This method
   is a stub in :class:`Cmd`; it exists to be overridden by subclasses.


Instances of :class:`Cmd` subclasses have some public instance variables:

.. attribute:: Cmd.prompt

   The prompt issued to solicit input.


.. attribute:: Cmd.identchars

   The string of characters accepted for the command prefix.


.. attribute:: Cmd.lastcmd

   The last nonempty command prefix seen.


.. attribute:: Cmd.cmdqueue

   A list of queued input lines.  The cmdqueue list is checked in
   :meth:`cmdloop` when new input is needed; if it is nonempty, its elements
   will be processed in order, as if entered at the prompt.


.. attribute:: Cmd.intro

   A string to issue as an intro or banner.  May be overridden by giving the
   :meth:`cmdloop` method an argument.


.. attribute:: Cmd.doc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for documented commands.


.. attribute:: Cmd.misc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for miscellaneous  help
   topics (that is, there are :meth:`!help_\*` methods without corresponding
   :meth:`!do_\*` methods).


.. attribute:: Cmd.undoc_header

   The header to issue if the help output has a section for undocumented  commands
   (that is, there are :meth:`!do_\*` methods without corresponding :meth:`!help_\*`
   methods).


.. attribute:: Cmd.ruler

   The character used to draw separator lines under the help-message headers.  If
   empty, no ruler line is drawn.  It defaults to ``'='``.


.. attribute:: Cmd.use_rawinput

   A flag, defaulting to true.  If true, :meth:`cmdloop` uses :func:`input` to
   display a prompt and read the next command; if false, :data:`sys.stdout.write() <sys.stdout>`
   and :data:`sys.stdin.readline() <sys.stdin>` are used. (This means that by importing
   :mod:`readline`, on systems that support it, the interpreter will automatically
   support :program:`Emacs`\ -like line editing  and command-history keystrokes.)


.. _cmd-example:

Cmd Example
-----------

.. sectionauthor:: Raymond Hettinger <python at rcn dot com>

The :mod:`cmd` module is mainly useful for building custom shells that let a
user work with a program interactively.

This section presents a simple example of how to build a shell around a few of
the commands in the :mod:`turtle` module.

Basic turtle commands such as :meth:`~turtle.forward` are added to a
:class:`Cmd` subclass with method named :meth:`!do_forward`.  The argument is
converted to a number and dispatched to the turtle module.  The docstring is
used in the help utility provided by the shell.

The example also includes a basic record and playback facility implemented with
the :meth:`~Cmd.precmd` method which is responsible for converting the input to
lowercase and writing the commands to a file.  The :meth:`!do_playback` method
reads the file and adds the recorded commands to the :attr:`~Cmd.cmdqueue` for
immediate playback::

    import cmd, sys
    from turtle import *

    class TurtleShell(cmd.Cmd):
        intro = 'Welcome to the turtle shell.   Type help or ? to list commands.\n'
        prompt = '(turtle) '
        file = None

        # ----- basic turtle commands -----
        def do_forward(self, arg):
            'Move the turtle forward by the specified distance:  FORWARD 10'
            forward(*parse(arg))
        def do_right(self, arg):
            'Turn turtle right by given number of degrees:  RIGHT 20'
            right(*parse(arg))
        def do_left(self, arg):
            'Turn turtle left by given number of degrees:  LEFT 90'
            left(*parse(arg))
        def do_goto(self, arg):
            'Move turtle to an absolute position with changing orientation.  GOTO 100 200'
            goto(*parse(arg))
        def do_home(self, arg):
            'Return turtle to the home position:  HOME'
            home()
        def do_circle(self, arg):
            'Draw circle with given radius an options extent and steps:  CIRCLE 50'
            circle(*parse(arg))
        def do_position(self, arg):
            'Print the current turtle position:  POSITION'
            print('Current position is %d %d\n' % position())
        def do_heading(self, arg):
            'Print the current turtle heading in degrees:  HEADING'
            print('Current heading is %d\n' % (heading(),))
        def do_color(self, arg):
            'Set the color:  COLOR BLUE'
            color(arg.lower())
        def do_undo(self, arg):
            'Undo (repeatedly) the last turtle action(s):  UNDO'
        def do_reset(self, arg):
            'Clear the screen and return turtle to center:  RESET'
            reset()
        def do_bye(self, arg):
            'Stop recording, close the turtle window, and exit:  BYE'
            print('Thank you for using Turtle')
            self.close()
            bye()
            return True

        # ----- record and playback -----
        def do_record(self, arg):
            'Save future commands to filename:  RECORD rose.cmd'
            self.file = open(arg, 'w')
        def do_playback(self, arg):
            'Playback commands from a file:  PLAYBACK rose.cmd'
            self.close()
            with open(arg) as f:
                self.cmdqueue.extend(f.read().splitlines())
        def precmd(self, line):
            line = line.lower()
            if self.file and 'playback' not in line:
                print(line, file=self.file)
            return line
        def close(self):
            if self.file:
                self.file.close()
                self.file = None

    def parse(arg):
        'Convert a series of zero or more numbers to an argument tuple'
        return tuple(map(int, arg.split()))

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        TurtleShell().cmdloop()


Here is a sample session with the turtle shell showing the help functions, using
blank lines to repeat commands, and the simple record and playback facility:

.. code-block:: none

    Welcome to the turtle shell.   Type help or ? to list commands.

    (turtle) ?

    Documented commands (type help <topic>):
    ========================================
    bye     color    goto     home  playback  record  right
    circle  forward  heading  left  position  reset   undo

    (turtle) help forward
    Move the turtle forward by the specified distance:  FORWARD 10
    (turtle) record spiral.cmd
    (turtle) position
    Current position is 0 0

    (turtle) heading
    Current heading is 0

    (turtle) reset
    (turtle) circle 20
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 40
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 60
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 80
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 100
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 120
    (turtle) right 30
    (turtle) circle 120
    (turtle) heading
    Current heading is 180

    (turtle) forward 100
    (turtle)
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 100
    (turtle)
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 400
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 500
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 400
    (turtle) right 90
    (turtle) forward 300
    (turtle) playback spiral.cmd
    Current position is 0 0

    Current heading is 0

    Current heading is 180

    (turtle) bye
    Thank you for using Turtle
